
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
Abstract. The sensitivity of explosives to thermal or mechanical stimuli is controlled by 
the  chemical  and  physical  properties  of  the  explosive  materials.  Integration  of  years  of 
study allows identification and comparison of several of these properties for explosives 
with  a  range  of  sensitivity    HMX  Explosive  D  LLM-105  and  TATB.  I  identify  key 
material  properties  that  determine  overall  sensitivity  including  the  extremely  safe 
behavior  of  Insensitive  High  Explosives  and  discuss  an  approach  to  predicting  the 
sensitivity or insensitivity of an explosive. 
An Integrated Look at Insensitive High Explosives  Why Are They Insensitive? 
The wide range of CHNO explosives exhibits 
an  equally  wide  range  of  sensitivities  to  different 
stimuli  deliberate  or  accidental.  Responses  may 
range  from  violent  detonations  to  very  slow 
combustion  like  wood  for  identical  stimuli 
depending on the sensitivity of the explosive. The 
type  of  explosive  known  as  Insensitive  High 
IHE  exhibits  particularly  benign 
behavior1  while  other  explosives  show  a  wide 
range of responses.  
In this paper I will identify and discuss many 
properties  of  explosives  that  when  integrated 
form  the  basis  for  the  insensitivity  of  some 
explosives.  The  primary  focus  is  on  properties  of 
the molecular explosive. The effect of formulation 
variations  will  be  of  less  emphasis  because  the 
safety of todays IHEs results from the molecular 
properties  and  also  because  formulation  effects 
are a complex topic beyond the scope of this work. 
Comparison of properties for a range of explosives 
allows  establishing  the  importance  of  each  and 
into  development  of  new 
explosive molecules. 
underlying  mechanisms 
In  considering  explosive  response  to  stimuli 
the  response  must  be  considered. 
Figure 1  shows  an  integrated  view  of  many 
mechanistic  steps  that  lead  to  explosive  ignition 
and  reaction  under  non-shock  conditions.2  A 
further  description 
publication.3 The concept of hot spots is central to 
explosive  initiation  shock  and  non-shock4  and 
represents  the  processes  involved  in  the  Ignition 
step  in  Figure  1.  A  simplified  view  of  hot  spot 
evolution is shown in Figure 2. The mechanisms in 
identification  of  material  properties  relevant  to 
explosive sensitivity and insensitivity. 
Fig.  1. Integrated  view  of  physical  and  chemical 
explosives under mechanical and thermal stimuli. 
Fig. 2.  Simplified mechanism of hotspot reaction 
with several relevant properties.  
I  will  consider  these  mechanisms  and  their 
underlying chemical and physical properties in the 
context of four explosives. Compared to the HMX 
baseline Explosive D is somewhat less sensitive to 
shock  and  heat  and  its  properties  form  the 
threshold  for  IHE  qualification  in  some  tests.1 
TATB  is  the  one  explosive  now  qualified  as  an 
IHE1  and  is  quite  different  from  the  others  in 
sensitivity.  LLM-105  is  in  between  Explosive  D 
and TATB in sensitivity and is currently an IHE 
Key Material Properties 
The  mechanisms  in  Figures  1  and  2  guide 
identification  of  key  material  properties 
underlie  explosive 
sensitivity.  Of  particular 
importance is that the generation of localized high 
temperatures  is  required  for  ignition  of  hot  spots. 
Therefore  material  properties  that  lead  to  lower 
temperatures  for  a  given  stimulus  and  material 
temperature will have a major effect on sensitivity.  
Molecular and Crystal Structure 
thermal  stability  of 
Features in the molecular and crystal structure 
molecule  as  well  as  influence  the  generation  of 
high  temperatures  leading  to  hot  spots.  These 
structures  are  shown  in  Figure  3  for  the  four 
explosives under consideration. 
Chemical structure factors that lead to highly 
intermolecular hydrogen bonding high symmetry 
inclusion  of  amino  and  nitro  groups  having  both 
offers  hydrogen  bonding  presence  of  the  strong 
C-NO2 bond and lack of the weaker N-NO2 bond.5 
Inspection of the molecular structures in Figure 3 
these  correlate  with  molecular 
sensitivity.  HMX  is  not  aromatic  has  no  amino 
groups and contains N-NO2 bonds. Explosive D is 
is  aromatic  with  amino 
groups and TATB has all of the desired attributes.  
The  crystal  structure  of  TATB  is  unique  in 
being  planar.  This  has  at  least  two  stabilizing 
effects    the  close  intermolecular  spacing  allows 
very  strong  hydrogen  bonding  and  physical 
deformation  of  the  crystal  can  occur  along  the 
planar  interfaces  with  very  little  disruption  of  the 
structure  and  therefore  very  little  heating.  This 
graphitic  nature  of  TATB  is  a  key  to  its  inherent 
insensitivity.  The  structure  of  LLM-105  appears 
somewhat  more  planar  than  that  of  HMX  or 
Explosive  D  although  I  am  unaware  of  shear 
strength data that would quantify this. 
Fig. 3. Molecular and crystal structure of explosives under review.67 
Thermophysical Properties 
dissipation  of  heat  from  ignition  sites  within  an 
thermal  conductivity  and 
specific  heat.  Comparison  of  these  properties 
across the four explosives is shown in Figure 4 and 
Table  1  along  with  other  properties  discussed 
later.  Here  the  high  thermal  conductivity  of 
TATB  promoted  by  its  graphitic  structure  stands 
out. Explosive D is lowest in thermal conductivity 
while the specific heat is about the same for all. 
Thermochemical Properties 
thermal  stability  of 
explosive is the most important determinant of its 
insensitivity.  This  is  commonly  quantified  by 
differential  scanning  calorimetry  DSC  which 
indicates  the  temperature  to  which  an  explosive 
must  be  heated  before  undergoing  exothermic 
reaction.  This  onset  temperature  is  shown  in 
Figure 4 for each explosive and we see that HMX 
and  Explosive D  are  similar  and  much 
thermally stable than LLM-105 and TATB.  
is  most  commonly  measured  at 
atmospheric  pressure  but  many  stimuli 
generate  heat  in  explosives  are  mechanically 
driven  and  therefore  occur  at  elevated  pressure. 
For  this  reason  work  is  underway  now  to  obtain 
DSC  data  on  explosives  at  pressures  up  to    5 
MPa  and  preliminary  data  are  reported  here  in 
Figure 5.8 These data were recorded at a very slow 
thermal  ramp  rate  1Kminute  to  enhance  the 
difference  at  different  pressures  whereas  typical 
DSC data are recorded at 5-10Kminute.  
Figure 5 shows that for HMX and TATB the 
onset  temperature  decreases  slightly  as  pressure 
increases.  In  contrast 
increases with pressure for Explosive D and LLM105. This is further illustrated in Figure 6 showing 
the  shift  in  onset  temperature  above  atmospheric 
pressure.  The  magnitudes  of 
approximately  0.4  KMPa  for  Explosive  D  and 
LLM-105 and  0.4 KMPa for HMX and TATB. 
To  assess  the  importance  of  these  data 
consider a mechanical impact where the pressure is 
50  MPa  12  kbar.  The  onset  temperature  for 
Explosive D and for LLM-105 increases by 20 K 
with  a  corresponding  reduction  of  20  K  for  the 
onset  temperature  of  HMX  and  TATB.  The 
stability of Explosive D is improved over that of  
Explosive D  LLM-105 
Fig.  4.  Comparison  of 
thermo-physical  and 
chemical  properties  note  thermal  conductivity 
values have been multiplied by 500 to fit to scale  
Table 1. Comparison of material properties those 
leading to insensitivity are highlighted and in bold 
Fig. 5. High-pressure differential scanning calorimetry for four explosives. Ramp rate  1Kmin sample 
size  350 micrograms. Pinhole in pan to allow pressure equilibration in cell. 
Fig. 6. Shift in peak exotherm temperature with 
pressure for four explosives. Unlabeled lines are 
for reference showing shifts of  0.4 KMPa. 
HMX  consistent  with  their  impact  and  shock 
sensitivities  discussed  below.  LLM-105  is  made 
more  stable  by  this  behavior  and  TATB  less 
stable  although  for  both  of  these  materials  the 
effect  is  perhaps  less  significant  given  their  very 
high onset temperatures at atmospheric pressure. 
Resulting Material Behaviors 
The  previous  section  primarily  addresses 
molecular  properties  in  the  context  of  onset  of 
ignition  from  localized  heating  as  shown  in 
Figures  1  and  2.  For  example  DSC  data  indicate 
the onset temperature for a very small sample  1 
milligram  with  little  influence  from  self-heating 
this  represents  the  initial  reactions  in  hot  spot 
formation  and  development.  For  subsequent 
reaction  propagation  and  spreading  to  yield  a 
behaviors  are  also  relevant.  These  result  from  a 
combination of several properties but nonetheless 
give  insight  into  the  overall  explosive  stability. 
Dimensional Time to eXplosion ODTX test and 
the  reaction  propagation  in  the  High  Pressure 
Strand Burner HPSB test as well as the change 
in material from physical or thermal damage.  
One Dimensional Time to Explosion ODTX 
In  the  ODTX  a  12.7  m  diameter  sphere  of 
explosive  is  inserted  into  a  preheated  sample 
holder  that  confines  the  gases  and  provides  a 
constant  temperature  boundary  condition  with 
essentially no initial void volume. The ODTX data 
of interest here are the time to explosion when the 
150 MPa confinement is broken as a function of 
the initial temperature. Further details are given by 
Hsu.9 The time to explosion includes the processes 
in Figure 2  initial heat flow into the sample heat 
generation in the sample heat flow out of the hot 
spot  and thus represents an integration of several 
material  properties.  For  example  self-heating  of 
the  ODTX  sample  is  important  much  more  so 
than  in  the  much  smaller  DSC  sample  and  is 
strongly  affected  by  the  thermal  conductivity  of 
the  sample.  ODTX  data  have  been  successfully 
to  develop  global  kinetic  models 
to  explosion  and  HMX 
ODTX data are shown in Figure 7 for the four 
explosives  of  interest.  TATB  shows  the  longest 
Explosive D shows longer times to explosion than 
LLM-105 at low temperatures with similar times 
at  high  temperatures.  This  is  consistent  with  the 
lower  thermal  conductivity  of  Explosive  D  in 
Figure  4    it  simply  takes  longer  for  heat  to 
penetrate  into  the  ODTX  sample  by  thermal 
Fig.  7.  One  dimensional 
ODTX data for the explosives of interest. 
ODTX  data  have  been  measured  with  the 
apparatus  vented  so  there  is  no  pressure  buildup. 
In  addition  the  effect  of  increased  void  volume 
has been reported for HMX. 
For HMX actually LX-04 85 wt HMX and 
15  wt  Viton  A  reducing  the  confinement 
pressure  from  150  MPa  to  50  MPa  increased  the 
initial  void  volume  and  doubled  the  time  to 
explosion  at  483 K  from  110  to  210  minutes.  In 
this case the increased initial void volume allowed 
decomposition gases to collect at lower pressures 
proceed for a longer time before ignition. Venting 
with  no  pressure  buildup  extended  the  reaction 
time to greater than 360 minutes.10 
For TATB data are available at 150 MPa and 
for  vented  samples.  For  pure  TATB  at  98  of 
theoretical  maximum  density  TMD  the  results 
are  unaffected  by  venting  at 
   540 K reaction times 0.5-17 minutes while 
at 520 K the time to explosion is increased from 57 
to  240  minutes  when  the  sample  is  vented.  For 
PBX 9502 95 wt TATB 5 wt Kel-F 800 at 
98 TMD there is essentially no change in time 
to  explosion  for  confined  and  vented  samples  for 
all temperatures reaction times 1-180 minutes.11  
The ODTX results in Figure 7 indicate overall 
thermal  stability  and  represent  an  integration  of 
many  material  properties.  As  such  the  effects  of 
these  properties  must  be  carefully  considered.  As 
Explosive  D  than  LLM-105  despite  lower  DSC 
onset  temperatures  are  consistent  with  the  lower 
thermal conductivity of Explosive D. However for 
samples heated internally rather than externally as 
occurs  in  hot-spot  formation  the  lower  thermal 
conductivity of Explosive D would reduce the heat 
loss  from  the  hot  spot  and  would  increase  its 
reactivity.  This  is  consistent  with  the  higher 
sensitivity of Explosive D as described below. 
The effect of void volume and hence buildup 
of gas pressure or venting is complex and requires 
consideration  of  chemical  mechanisms  to  unravel 
 this is beyond the scope of this work and further 
discussion  was  provided  by  Burnham.1213  One 
might  expect  that  vented  samples  would  always 
samples  inasmuch  as  the  released  gases  carry 
away  energy  that  would  otherwise  contribute  to 
the  eventual  runaway  reaction    however  as 
described above this is not seen with PBX 9502. 
This  behavior  shows 
integrated behavior in the ODTX test. 
the  complexity  of 
High Pressure Strand Burner 
The  propagation  of  reaction  from  an  initial 
the  explosive  material.  The 
deflagration  behavior  of  explosives  has  been 
quantified using a high pressure strand burner as 
previously  described.1415  In  brief  an  explosive 
sample  of  6.4  mm  diameter  and  64  mm  length  is 
ignited  at  one  end  and  the  progress  of  the 
deflagration along its length is monitored by time 
of arrival wires and pressure. Initial pressures may 
range  from  5-400  MPa.  The  pressure  vessel 
volume  is  sized  so  the  pressure  increases  by 
roughly  a  factor  of  four  during  an  experiment 
providing the pressure dependence of deflagration 
across a range of pressures with only a few tests.  
While  deflagration 
rate  data  have  been 
published  for  HMX  LLM-105  and  TATB  the 
data  for  Explosive  D  were  measured  but  not 
previously published data are shown in Figure 8. 
Two features stand out. First the deflagration rate 
at  pressures  below    150  MPa  lies  below  that  of 
the LX-04 baseline LX-04 with 15 wt Viton A 
and  85  wt  HMX  shows  uniform  deflagration 
behavior  across  the  entire  pressure  range  and 
serves  as  a  useful  reference  for  comparison. 
Second  above    150  MPa  the  deflagration  rate 
shows  the  significant  increases  with  somewhat 
typifies  deconsolidative 
burning.1415  In  this  regime  the  high  pressure  is 
causing damage resulting in fracture and increased 
surface area before the deflagration front arrives in 
the material. The deflagration front spreads rapidly 
igniting  the  surface  of  the  fractured  particles 
which subsequently burn at the inherent burn rate 
corresponds to the damage flame spread and  
Fig.  8.  Deflagration  rate  data  for  Explosive  D.  
LX-04 85 wt HMX 15 wt Viton A is shown 
for comparison. Density 1.68gcc 98 TMD. 
pressure regimes with no deconsolidative burning 
shows the decreasing rates in the sequence HMX  
Explosive D  LLM-105  TATB. These results are 
also  included  in  Figure  4.  Second  the  propensity 
of the material to undergo deconsolidative burning 
either  in  its  pure  form  Explosive  D  or  in  some 
formulations  low-binder  HMX 
deflagration  and  hence  energy  release  with  these 
materials  in  situations  where  pressures  may  build 
up statically or dynamically.  
for  significantly  higher 
Unlike the properties and behaviors discussed 
previously  deflagration  behavior  does  not 
necessarily indicate the ease with which a reaction 
can  be  initiated.  It  does  directly  indicate  the 
expected  reaction  violence  following  initiation. 
That  said  the  deflagration  behavior  is  certainly 
affected  by  some  of  the  same  parameters  that 
govern  reaction  initiation.  In  solid  samples  e.g. 
not  deconsolidated  the  burn  front  is  propagated 
by  heat  from  the  flame  being  conducted  into 
unburned  explosive  and  causing  it  to  decompose 
generate  gas  and  then  ignite.  A  material  with  a 
high ignition temperature such as TATB requires 
more heat for ignition and therefore more time for 
heat flow and a slower deflagration rate.  
In  addition  grain  scale  features 
properties. For example different grain structures 
within a pure explosive such as Explosive D may 
lead  to  different  likelihood  for  material  fracture 
and  deconsolidation  and  therefore  to  different 
reaction violence for the same material. 
Material Damage  Physical Mechanical Thermal 
The  effect  of  material  damage  on 
sensitivity to ignition or reaction propagation may 
be  profound.  Damage  may  arise  from  physical 
discussion  of  material  damage  and  its  effects  are 
beyond  the  scope  of  this  work  as  there  has  been 
much  work  in  this  area  for  example21415181920 
and  many  others.  I  will  present  just  a  few 
thermal  stimuli.  A 
An  example  of  a  physical  stimuli  is  the 
imposition  and  subsequent  release  of  external 
pressure.  A  sample  of  LX-04  pressure  cycled  to 
200  MPa  in  the  high  pressure  strand  burner 
showed  a  very  high  and  unexpected  deflagration 
combustion  steps  in  Figure  1.  Deconsolidative 
burning has been seen in HMX formulations with 
5-10  wt  binder  while  formulations  with  15-20 
this  behavior.1415 
wt  binder  do  not  show 
Explosive  D  is  a  pure  explosive  without  binder 
and the onset of deconsolidative burning indicates 
that its mechanical properties such as strength and 
friability are more similar to low-binder than highof 
deconsolidative  burning  has  been  shown 
increased  violence  of 
Deflagration data for HMX1415 LLM-105 and 
TATB18  and  Explosive  D  Figure  8  are  shown 
together  in  Figure  9.  The  straight  line  for  HMX 
represents  the  behavior  of  high-binder  HMX 
explosive  LX-04  15  wt  Viton  A  which  does 
not  exhibit  deconsolidative  burning.  The  HMX 
region  above  the  line  at  high  pressure  represents 
the range of deconsolidative burning seen for lowbinder  HMX  explosives  5-10  wt  binder  e.g. 
LX-07  LX-10  PBX-9501.  In  contrast  to  HMX 
and  Explosive  D  LLM-105  and  TATB  do  not 
exhibit  deconsolidative  burning  even  at  high 
pressures.  Note  that  the  LLM-105  line  represents 
results  from  a  series  of  formulations  with  6-7.5 
wt inert binder Viton A or Kel-F 800 and the 
TATB line represents results with 5-7.5 wt inert 
Fig.  9.  Comparison  of  deflagration  behavior  for 
four  explosives.  Filled  in  areas  at  top  right 
represent deconsolidative burning for Explosive D 
and for high-HMX explosives. 
A  couple  of  key  points  may  be  drawn  from 
Figure  9.  First  comparison  across  explosives  for 
importance  of  phase  change  on  deflagration  and 
reaction propagation. 
Other  effects  of  thermal  damage  include 
increasing increased permeability and deflagration 
rate  for  materials  that  do  not  undergo  phase 
change.19  Such  changes  can  lead  to  the  onset  of 
deconsolidative  burning  and  increased  reaction 
Manifestation  of  Relevant  Material  Properties 
in Explosive Sensitivity 
the  material  properties 
discussed  above  leads  to  an  expected  ordering  of 
explosive  sensitivity  among  the  four  materials 
under  discussion.  For  all  properties  HMX  is  the 
most sensitive and TATB is the least sensitive and 
this comparison does not tell us much. Comparison 
of  LLM-105  and  Explosive  D  is  more  fruitful. 
Chemical structure considerations favor LLM-105 
stability    presence  of  an  aromatic  ring  and  nitro 
Explosive  D  allows  hot  spot  energy  to  dissipate 
more  rapidly  and  therefore  requires  a  greater 
energy input for otherwise equal conditions. LLM105  also  has  more  favorable  thermal  stability   
higher DSC onset temperature  while both LLM105  and  Explosive  D  show  increase  in  onset 
temperature with increasing pressure. ODTX data 
are  similar  for  both  at  high  temperature  and  the 
longer time to explosion at low temperatures with 
Explosive  D  presumably  results  from  its  lower 
thermal conductivity. Finally for a given pressure 
the  deflagration  rate  for  LLM-105  is  lower  than 
that  of  Explosive  D  and  LLM-105  does  not 
exhibit deconsolidative burning while Explosive D 
does at high pressures. Based on these properties 
it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  LLM-105  to  be 
more less sensitive than Explosive D. 
Figure  11  compares  the  sensitivity  of  these 
hammer  impact  and  to  shock  gap  test.  The 
results  are  consistent  with  the  above  summary  of 
material  properties   HMX  and  TATB  define  the 
lower  and  upper  bounds  of  sensitivity  with 
Explosive D being somewhat more sensitive than 
rate  at  the  upper  extreme  of  those  shown  in 
Figure 9.  The  cause  was  clear  upon  inspection  of 
samples  that  were  pressure  cycled.  As  seen  in 
Figure  10  the  robust  structure  of  this  explosive 
with 15 wt binder was completely disrupted after 
being pressure cycled. This was attributed to highpressure  argon  diffusing  into  the  Viton-A  binder 
during  pressurization  when 
rapidly  depressurized  the  gas  formed  bubbles  in 
the  binder  before 
it  could  diffuse  out  and 
physically  disrupted  the  sample.  This  physical 
stimuli was not one that was anticipated to lead to 
increased reactivity and this mechanism could be 
present in real systems with confinement that fails 
Fig. 10. LX-04 85 wt HMX 15 wt Viton A 
before  and  after  pressure-  cycling  with  argon. 
500X magnification. 
A  different  form  of  damage  may  be  incurred 
in material processing. For example the sensitivity 
of Explosive D to shock is greatly increased after 
it  has  been  pressed  into  and  then  removed  from 
projectiles or other munitions.21 While this type of 
processing  should  not  change 
properties  of  the  explosive  it  almost  certainly 
in  mechanical  damage  of 
Exposure  of  explosives  to  high  temperatures 
may  lead  to  chemical  degradation  or  to  physical 
changes  that  lead  to  sensitization.  An  example  of 
this is heating of HMX explosives above the betato-delta  phase 
transition.  We  have  observed 
increases in the deflagration rate of LX-04 which 
does  not  otherwise  exhibit  deconsolidative 
burning  when  heated  above  433  K  the  phase 
transition temperature141523 the deflagration rates 
were  similar  to  the  deconsolidative  burning  rates 
in  Figure  9.  By  pressurizing  samples  before 
heating  we  were  able  to  prevent  the  phase 
transition  and  those  samples  had  a  much  lower 
Fig.  11.  Impact  and  shock  sensitivity  comparison 
note  shock  sensitivity  data  have  been  multiplied 
by 5 to fit to scale. 
A  similar  comparison  may  be  drawn  for  the 
violence  of  thermal  explosion  as  measured  in  the 
Scaled Thermal Explosion Experiment.1722 In this 
test  a  cylindrical  explosive  sample    50  mm 
diameter  200 mm length is confined in a sealed 
steel tube and heated until explosion. The violence 
is  assessed  by  measurement  of  the  wall  velocity. 
More details are given elsewhere.1722 HMX-based 
tested  under  many 
explosives  have  been 
confinement  strength  heating  rate  and  exhibit 
wall velocities ranging from very little reaction to 
essentially  full  detonation.22  In  the  only  test  with 
Explosive D the violence was fairly low and there 
was considerable unreacted material expelled from 
the  vessel  during  the  test.17  One  STEX  run  was 
executed with PBX 9502 and was so benign that 
the vessel leaked the built-up gases and there was 
no explosion if the vessel had not leaked it would 
have eventually burst from the building pressure. 
There  are  no  STEX  data  with  LLM-105.  In  the 
absence  of  LLM-105  data  and  with  the  limited 
data  for  Explosive  D  the  STEX  results  are  in 
agreement with the expected order of sensitivity as 
discussed  above  consistent  with  analysis  of  the 
material properties. 
Prediction  of  Explosive  Insensitivity  Based  on 
Inherent Material Properties 
The  material  properties  and  the  resulting 
material behaviors presented and discussed above 
form  at  least  a  partial  basis  for  determining  the 
sensitive  or  insensitive  nature  of  explosives.  The 
presence  of  an  aromatic  ring  nitro  and  amino 
groups  in  a  structure  that  promotes  hydrogen 
bonding  absence  of  C-NO2  bonds  and  a  crystal 
morphology  that  allows  crystal  shear  without 
generation  of  high 
temperatures  are  all  key 
molecular  and  crystallographic  properties.  High 
thermal conductivity and high thermal stability as 
exotherm  are  also 
dependence  of  the  DSC  onset  temperature  may 
also help stabilize the explosive for materials with 
a positive slope in onset temperature vs. pressure. 
ODTX  data  provide  insight  into  the  thermal 
sensitivity  although  these  are  the  result  of  an 
integrated  set  of  mechanisms  and  interpretation 
may be misleading e.g. longer reaction times for 
Explosive  D  apparently  dont  indicate  greater 
thermal  stability  but  low  thermal  conductivity. 
Finally  the  pressure-dependent  deflagration  rate 
and  any  occurrence  of  deconsolidative  burning 
will  have  a  significant  effect  on  ultimate  reaction 
violence. Just as these properties correctly predict 
Explosive D  they  can  be  compared  for  other 
explosives  to  evaluate  relative  insensitivity.  It  is 
possible  that  through  integrated  modeling  of 
explosive  response  threshold  values  for  these 
parameters  can  be  defined  which  determine  if  an 
explosive qualifies as an IHE. 
sensitivity  of  LLM-105 
Summary and Conclusions 
By comparing several material properties and 
behaviors across a set of explosives ranging from 
fairly  sensitive  to  insensitive  a  consistent  picture 
has  been  formed  of  the  physical  and  chemical 
basis  for  the  insensitive  nature  of  IHEs.  The 
relevant properties and behaviors are summarized 
in  the  paragraph  immediately  preceding  this  one. 
Currently TATB is the only explosive qualified as 
an  IHE.  By  understanding  the  properties  that 
underlie  its  unique  nature  the  prospects  for 
development  of  new  explosive  molecules  with 
improved  performance  while  maintaining  similar 
insensitivity may be enhanced. Influence of detonation front curvature on the response of embedded 
electromagnetic particle velocity gauges  
Arnaud Sollier Philippe Hbert Viviane Bouyer Michel Doucet Roland Letremy Xavier Leborgne 
Lionel Decaris Rmy Sorin Philippe Manczur Noel Carion Dana M. Dattelbaum Stephen A. 
Sheffield Richard L. Gustavsen
CEA DAM DIF F-91297 Arpajon France 
CEA DAM Le Ripault F-37260 Monts France  
Shock and Detonation Physics Mailstop P952 Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 
Abstract. We have completed a series of experiments to study the ability of embedded 
electromagnetic particle velocity gauges to characterize multi-dimensional reactive flows. 
To  this  aim  a  specific  setup  was  developed  to  provide  steady  detonations  with  various 
levels of curvature by changing the dimensions and the nature of the explosive samples. 
Our results clearly show that the curvature has a pronounced effect on the response of the 
gauge  but  it  is  still  possible  to  extract  valuable  information  from  the  gauge  records  by 
taking into account the curvature in the analysis process. These results led us to design a 
new specific gauge for curved detonation front characterization consisting only of shock 
trackers  aligned  on  the  same  reference  line.  These  new  gauges  have  been  successfully 
tested in both initiation and steady detonation conditions. In this work we also present a 
new theoretical method to assess the response of the gauges in multi-dimensional reactive 
flows  which  appears  to  be  a  very  effective  way  to  check  the  predictions  of  various 
reactive burn models in multi-dimensional flows.  
Among  all  the  experimental  techniques  used 
to  characterize  the  reactive  flows  in  detonating 
high  explosives  the  embedded  electromagnetic 
particle velocity gauge method developed and used 
at Los Alamos1-2 is probably one of the finest and 
most accurate. Over the recent past this technique 
has  been  extensively  used  to  study  the  initiation 
behavior  of  many  different  explosives  under 
various kinds of solicitations3-8. However all these 
experiments  are  purposely  designed  to  be  1-D  so 
the  flow  can  be  characterized  by  the  gauge 
technique and be more easily understood whereas 
in most high explosive devices the reactive flows 
are 2-D andor 3-D.  
The object of this study is to check whether or 
not the embedded electromagnetic particle velocity 
gauge method can be applied to characterize multidimensional  reactive  flows.  To  this  aim  we  have 
developed a specific experimental set-up in which 
multiple  magnetic  gauging  is  used  to  monitor  the 
time.  The  gauge  measurements 
curved  detonation  flow  at  the  end  of  a  long 
cylindrical  rod  of  high  explosive.  The  level  of 
curvature  of  the  steady  detonation  wave  is  varied 
by changing the  nature and the dimensions of the 
high  explosive.  Explosive  samples  are  prepared 
with  a  stirrup  gauge  and  a  classical  LANL  gauge 
electromagnetic  particle  velocity  gauges 
measure  the  evolution  of  the  wave  and  three 
shock  trackers  to  track  the  position  of  the  front 
complemented  by  a  front  curvature  measurement 
measurements.  Our  results  clearly  show  that  the 
curvature has a pronounced effect on the response 
of  the  gauge  but  it  is  still  possible  to  extract 
valuable  information  from  the  gauge  records  by 
taking  into  account  the  curvature  in  the  analysis 
process. These results have led us to design a new 
characterization consisting only of shock trackers 
aligned  on  the  same  reference  line.  The  results 
obtained  with  this  new  gauge  package  are  also 
presented  in  both  initiation  and  steady  detonation 
for  curved  detonation 
detonator and an explosive booster when required. 
The  level  of  curvature  of  the  steady  detonation 
wave is varied by changing the nature of the high 
explosive HMX or TATB and the diameter of the 
rod  20  mm  or  50  mm.  The  large  rods  have  a 
length  of  600  mm  whereas  the  small  ones  have  a 
length of 300 mm. Explosives samples containing 
the gauge package are glued to the opposite end of 
the  explosive  cartridge  using  Araldite  2011 
adhesive.  They  are  made  of  pairs  of  30  wedges 
which  are  assembled  around  an  electromagnetic 
particle  velocity  gauge  package  reforming  a 
cylinder  of  either  20  mm  in  diameter  by  10  mm 
high  or  50  mm  in  diameter  by  25  mm  high.  The 
gauge  package  consists  of  nine  particle  velocity 
gauges and three  shock tracker gauges  made of 5 
thick  aluminum  conductors  sandwiched 
between  two  25  m  thick  sheets  of  FEP  Teflon
its  global  displacement  being 
In  order  to  analyze  our  gauge  records  and  to 
better  understand  the  response  of  the  gauges  to 
multi-dimensional  flows  we  have  performed  2-D 
Eulerian  simulations  in  which  each  gauge  wire  is 
discretized in multiple Eulerian-Lagrangian virtual 
inferred from the Eulerian flow. These calculations 
show  that  the  connectors  participation  to  the 
measurement is noticeable which is not the case in 
purely  1-D  flows.  The  comparison  of 
simulations  with  the  experiments  also  appears  to 
be a very effective way to check the predictions of 
various reactive burn models in multi-dimensional 
Experimental configurations 
2-D Magnetic gauging configuration 
In  our  experiments  we  used  the  magnetic 
gauge  technique  developed  and  used  at  Los 
Alamos1-2 to monitor the curved detonation flow at 
the end of long cylindrical rods of high explosive. 
A  sketch  of  our  experimental  configuration  is 
shown in Fig. 1. A detonation wave is initiated in a 
cylinder  of  explosive  using  an  explosive  wire 
Fig.  1.  Photograph  top  and  3-D  schematic 
drawing bottom of our experimental setup. 
For the 50 mm diameter samples we use full 
scale  gauge  packages  RdF  PN  24144-6A 
whereas  for  the  20  mm  diameter  ones  we  use 
reduced  scale  factor  08  gauge  packages  RdF 
PN 24145-6A. The gauge package is glued to the 
explosive  wedges  using  Araldite  2011  adhesive 
left picture in Fig. 2.  In our experiments one or 
two  additional  stirrup  particle  velocity  gauges 
RdF PN 24141-2 are also mounted on the front 
of the sample between the explosive rod and the 
explosive sample so they provide a measurement 
input  detonation  characteristics  right 
picture  in  Fig.  2. The  back  face  of  the  explosive 
parallelepiped  which 
complementary  measurements.  The  whole  target 
assembly  is  surrounded  by  two  sets  of  three 
permanent  magnets  left  part  of  Fig.  1  that 
produce  a  uniform  1000  Gauss  field  in  gauge 
Fig. 2. Pictures of a 50 mm diameter HMX target 
assembly  with  the  gauge  package  glued  on  the 
bottom  wedge  left  and  the  stirrup  gauges  glued 
on the front surface of the final target right. 
Complementary diagnostics 
In  order  to  characterize  the  curvature  of  the 
detonation  front  and  its  influence  on  the  gauge 
data  the  gauge  measurements  are  complemented 
by  a  front  curvature  measurement  and  multiple 
measurements  of  the  explosivewindow  interface. 
in  Fig.  3  all  measurements  are 
performed  along  the  same  reference  line.  For  the 
parallelepiped is used as a full reflection prism. To 
this  aim  all  its  surfaces  are  optically  polished. 
Depending on the configuration a Profoto flash or 
a  pyrotechnic  argon  flash  are  used  to  light  the 
glassexplosive interface at 45 incidence see Fig. 
4. An optical system is then used to send the light 
to  the  entrance  slit  of  a  high  speed  mechano
curvature  measurement 
optical  camera.  A  high  frequency  laser  diode  is 
used  to  get  a  timing  reference  on  the  front 
curvature pictures. 
Fig.  3.  Schematic  view  of  the  positions  of  the 
different measurements.   
Fig. 4. Photograph of the back of a complete setup.   
The  glass  parallelepiped  is  also  used  as  a 
interface  velocity  measurements 
which are not further discussed in this paper. 
LANL sustained shock initiation setup  
In order to test the response of multiple shock 
tracker  gauges  two  sustained  shock  initiation 
experiments  were  performed  with  the  LANL  50 
mm large-bore two-stage light gas gun. A scheme 
of the experimental configuration is shown in Fig. 
5. In these experiments Kel-F 81 impactors  were 
launched onto PBX 9502 samples at about 3 kms 
giving  impact  pressures  around  15.1  GPa.  These 
impact  velocities  were  purposely  chosen  at  the 
high-end  of  the  LANL  large-bore  two-stage  gas 
both  sides  those  performed  in  the  presence  of 
gauges show a significant asymmetry. On the side 
where the gauge is closer to the interface where the 
measurement  is  performed  top  of  the  setup  the 
detonation wave is delayed.  On the other side we 
get results which are similar to those of curvature 
measurements performed without any gauge. This 
clearly demonstrates that the presence of the gauge 
perturbs  the  detonation  wave  in  a  narrow  region 
around it and that the curvature must be taken into 
account in the analysis of the gauge data. 
Fig.  6.  Front  curvature  measurements.  The  gauge 
package is closer to the interface on the top.  
Figure 7 shows the waveforms obtained with a 
50  mm  diameter  TATB  rod  characterized  by  a 
medium level of curvature of the detonation front. 
There are eleven waveforms from gauges that were 
at  depths  of  0  to  8.5  mm  into  the  explosive  the 
two  first  ones  are  from  the  stirrup  gauges  on  the 
front  of  the  explosive  target  and  the  remaining 
nine  from  the  multiple  embedded  gauge.  For  the 
sake  of  comparison  Figure  8  shows  similar 
waveforms  obtained  with  a  20  mm  diameter 
TATB  rod  characterized  by  a  high  level  of 
curvature of the detonation front. In this case the 
ten gauges only one stirrup gauge were at depths 
of 0 to 6.6 mm into the explosive. We can see that 
in both experiments the gauges measured reliably 
even  when  the  detonation  front  curvature  was 
gun  capability  in  order  to  ensure  initiation  of  the 
Fig.  5.  Schematic  of  the  LANL  sustained  shock 
initiation experimental geometry. 
The  multiple  shock  tracker  gauges  package  was 
embedded in the explosive at an angle of 30 and 
stirrup  gauges  were  mounted  on  the  front  of  the 
sample  to  provide  a  measurement  of  the  input 
shock  characteristics.  A  Kel-F  800  window  was 
also  used  to  perform  PDV  and  VISAR  interface 
velocity  measurements  which  are  described  in 
another paper of these proceedings9. 
For  our  2-D  Magnetic  gauging  experiments 
we  used  either  T2  TATB-based  explosive 
containing 97 wt.  TATB powder with a density 
of  1858  gcm3  or  X1  HMX-based  explosive 
containing 96 wt.  HMX powder with a density 
For  the  LANL  sustained  shock  initiation 
experiments  the  TATB  samples  were  made  of 
virgin  PBX  9502  composed  of  95  wt.    TATB 
powder  and  5  wt.    Kel-F  800  binder.  The 
average density of the samples was 1.886  0.004 
two  successful  experiments 
For each configuration we have completed at 
reproducibility.  Figure  6  shows  the  results  of 
optical  curvature  measurements  in  three  different 
configurations. As can be seen the presence of the 
gauge  package  has  a  significant  effect  on  the 
curvature of the detonation front. Indeed whereas 
curvature  measurements  performed  without  any 
gauge  not  shown  give  symmetrical  results  on 
Shock tracker gauges were used to follow the 
position  of  the  detonation  front  with  time.  When 
the  wave  crosses  a  step  on  the  shock  tracker  the 
gauges  output  voltage  changes  and  a  xt  curve 
can therefore be built by plotting the position x of 
the  gauge  step  versus  the  time  t  that  the  wave 
crosses  the  step.  Figure  9  shows  xt  data  for  the 
20 mm diameter TATB experiment.  
Fig. 7. Particle velocity waveforms from a 50 mm 
diameter TATB rod medium curvature.  
Fig. 8. Particle velocity waveforms from a 20 mm 
diameter TATB rod large curvature.  
All  the  waveforms  are  characteristics  of  a 
detonation  with  a  von  Neumann  spike  which  is 
not  fully  resolved  because  of  the  limited  time 
resolution  of  the  gauge  followed  by  a  rapid 
decrease  of  the  velocity.  We  can  notice  that  the 
velocity  profiles  are  much  better  resolved  in  the 
medium curvature case  which is partly due to an 
increase  of  the  mean  rising  time  of  the  gauge 
waveforms  from  17  ns  for  the  50  mm  TATB 
experiment  to  25  ns  for  the  20  mm  TATB 
experiment. We also observe that the velocity drop 
behind  the  front  is  more  important  in  the  20  mm 
experiment Fig. 8 than in the 50 mm experiment 
Fig. 7. As expected this observation  shows that 
the  relaxation  history  depends  on  the  diameter  of 
the rod and is faster for the smaller rods. 
Fig. 9. Position of the detonation front versus time 
xt for the 20 mm diameter TATB experiment. 
curvature there is a significant difference between 
the  arrival  of  the  wave  at  the  center  of  the  rod 
gauges  and  central  tracker  and  its  arrival  at  the 
borders left and right trackers. Moreover the xt 
data  do  not  follow  exactly  a  straight  line  which 
should  be  the  case  for  a  sustained  detonation  at 
constant  velocity.  However  if  one  corrects  the 
data  by  taking  into  account  the  curvature  of  the 
front as shown in Fig. 10 one finally gets a quasistraight xt curve with a corresponding detonation 
velocity  of  7517  ms  which  is  in  very  good 
agreement  with  previous  measurements  for  this 
diameter10.  Figure  11  shows  xt  data  for  the  50 
mm diameter TATB experiment. One notices that 
because  of  the  smaller  curvature  the  differences 
are much smaller than for the 20 mm diameter rod. 
Once again if the data are processed by taking into 
account  the  effect  of  the  front  curvature  one 
recovers  a  quasi-straight  xt  curve  with  a 
corresponding  detonation  velocity  of  7593  ms 
which  is  also  in  very  good  agreement  with 
previous measurements for this larger diameter10.  
Fig.  10.  Corrected  xt  curve  for  the  20  mm 
diameter TATB experiment.  
Fig.  11.  Position  of  the  detonation  front  versus 
the  50  mm  diameter  TATB 
At first glance it seems therefore that despite 
the significant effect of the front curvature on the 
particle  velocity  waveforms  it  is  still  possible  to 
extract  valuable  information  from  the  gauge  data 
and  especially  the  shock  trackers  by  taking  into 
account the curvature in the data processing. This 
consisting  only  of  shock  trackers  aligned  on  the 
same reference line.  
to  design  a  new  gauge  package 
New gauge design and results 
The new gauges were designed by LANL and 
manufactured  by  RdF.  They  consist  of  5  shock 
trackers  RdF  PN  24155-5  aligned  on  the  same 
reference  line.  Figure  12  below  shows  a  drawing 
of the 5 shock trackers gauge.  
Fig.  12.  Drawing  of  the  new  5  shock  trackers 
gauge package RdF PN 24155-5.  
Two sustained shock initiation experiments on 
PBX 9502 were fired in order to test the response 
of these  multiple shock trackers gauges and asses 
wave  front  curvature.  The  results  of  shot  2s-791 
are shown in Fig. 13.  
Fig.  13.  Response  of  all  5  shock  trackers  in  shot 
The  corresponding  xt  curves  are  shown  in 
Fig.  14.  One  can  see  that  despite  the  one 
dimensional character of the experiment there is a 
significant scatter in the data of the shock trackers 
which  could  be  due  to  both  gauge  misalignment 
and impact tilt. The run distance xD and run time 
tD to detonation were determined by a 2-segment 
piecewise  linear  fit  to  the  xt  curve  of  Tracker  3 
central  position.  The  results  of  this  fit  are  xD   
3.92  mm  and  tD    0.719  s.  The  detonation 
velocity  was  determined  by  averaging 
detonation velocities obtained by a linear fit to the 
xt  data  for  all  five  trackers  at  late  times  postturnover.  The 
summarized in Table 1. 
Fig. 14. xt curves for all 5 shock trackers in shot 
Table 1.  Detonation velocities calculated from all 
All these results clearly  validate the behavior 
of  the  all  shock  tracker  gauges  and  demonstrate 
that  they  are  able  to  characterize  shock  and 
detonation fronts with some tilt. We therefore used 
the five shock trackers gauge in our highly curved 
20  mm  diameter  TATB  configuration.  The  shock 
trackers data obtained in one of these experiments 
are shown in Fig. 15. We can see that the profiles 
of  the  shock  tracker  signals  are  quite  different 
experiment  shown  in  Fig.  13.  In  this  former 
experiment  the  baseline  was  almost  straight  and 
the oscillations patterns had a square shape. This is 
also the case for tracker 3 located at the center of 
the gauge and therefore submitted to a quasi-plane 
detonation.  For  the  other  trackers  the  baseline 
becomes more chaotic and the oscillations patterns 
become  more  triangular  as  one  reaches  the  edges 
id. as the curvature increases. The corresponding 
xt  curves  are  shown  in  Fig.  16.  They  are  quite 
similar  to  those  obtained  in  the  same  conditions 
with the old gauge package shown in Fig. 9. One 
interesting feature is the quasi-perfect symmetry of 
the  results  obtained  from  both  sides  of  the  gauge 
package  Tracker  1  vs.  Tracker  5  and  Tracker  2 
vs. Tracker 4 which shows that the experiment is 
perfectly axi-symmetric. 
Fig.  15.  Response  of  all  5  shock  trackers  in  a  20 
mm diameter TATB experiment.  
Fig. 16. xt curves for all 5 shock trackers in our 
20 mm diameter TATB experiment.  
We  also  re-processed  the  data  to  take  into 
account  the  effect  of  the  front  curvature  and  we 
recovered  quasi-straight  xt  curves  for  all  shock 
trackers with a corresponding detonation velocity 
of 7550 ms  which is in  good agreement  with the 
value  measured  with  the  old  LANL  gauge 
package Fig. 10 in the same conditions and with 
previous measurements10.   
All  these  results  show  that  multiple  shock 
trackers  gauges  are  particularly  well  suited  to 
characterize  tilted  impacts  or  curved  reactive 
flows. Such gauges might therefore be used in the 
soon  future  to  directly  record  Dn  curves  in  a 
single  experiment  whereas  this  currently  requires 
multiple experiments. 
3 exits at the edge. In Figure 18 we compare the 
electrical  signals  obtained 
simulation  with  the  experimental  ones  for  the  20 
mm diameter TATB experiment. The curves show 
the evolution of the voltage induced in each gauge 
as a function of time.  
Numerical simulations 
Over  the  recent  past  the  results  of  particle 
velocity gauges have been widely used to calibrate 
reactive burn models through direct comparison of 
the  experimental  waveforms  with  the  simulated 
ones7811.  However  most  of  these  studies  have 
in  1-D  conditions  and  are 
therefore  not  directly  applicable  to  our  problem. 
We  therefore  tried  to  find  a  way  to  directly  infer 
simulation.  To  this  aim  we  have  performed  2-D 
eulerian  Direct  Numerical 
Simulations with the Hesione hydrocode in which 
each  gauge  was  discretized  in  a  number  of 
Lagrangian  points  moving  with  the  detonation 
flow.  A  paper  describing  in  more  details  this 
numerical  analysis12  is  in  preparation.  From  the 
displacement of the whole gauge we can calculate 
the  current  induced  in  the  wire  and  emulate  the 
experimental signal. One important result of these 
displacement  of  the  gauge  it  is  necessary  to  take 
into  account  not  only  the  active  element  of  the 
gauge  but  also  the  different  connectors  see  Fig. 
17  in  order  to  correctly  reproduce  the  late  time 
evolution of the experimental signal. 
Fig. 17. Scheme of the simulated gauges.   
In the case of the 20 mm TATB cylinder only 
the  active  element  and  the  first  connector  are 
included in the explosive sample but for the larger 
50  mm  cylinder  the  whole  gauge  is  included 
inside the explosive sample and only the connector 
Fig.  18.  Comparison  of  the  electrical  signals 
delivered  by  the  gauges  with  the  calculated  ones 
for  our  20  mm  diameter  TATB  experiment.  The 
first  subfigure  top  left  corresponds  to  the  signal 
of  the  stirrup  gauge  and  the  other  9  subfigures 
from left to right and top to bottom correspond to 
the signals of the nine particle velocity gauges.  
Calculations  show  a  very  steep  von  Neuman 
spike  which  is  not  present  in  the  measurements 
because  of  the  limited  time  resolution  of  the 
gauge followed by a rapid velocity drop. There is 
an overall good agreement between measurements 
and  calculations  but  as  can  be  seen  in  Fig.  19 
calculations  only  correctly  reproduce  the  release 
part  if  the  active  element  is  included  in  the 
Figure  20  shows  a  similar  comparison  for  the  50 
mm  diameter  TATB  experiment.  The 
subfigure top left corresponds to the signal of the 
stirrup gauge and the other 9 subfigures from left 
to  right  and  top  to  bottom  correspond  to  the 
signals  of  the  nine  particle  velocity  gauges.  As 
connector  C2  which  is  parallel  to  the  active 
displacement  with  the  flow  creates  another  sharp 
peak  in  the  signal  which  provides  a  very  severe 
the  calculations.  This 
connector could therefore be used in the future as a 
second  gauge  located  deeper  inside  the  explosive 
for large samples. We notice that once again there 
measurements and calculations but as can be seen 
in  Fig.  21  it  is  necessary  to  include  all  the 
connectors  and  to  take  into  account  the  larger 
experimental signal. 
time  evolution  of 
Fig.  19.  Influence  of  the  connector  on  the  signal 
delivered  by  three  extreme  gauges  in  a  20  mm 
diameter TATB cylinder. 
Fig.  20.  Comparison  of 
waveforms with the calculated ones for our 50 mm 
diameter TATB experiment medium curvature.  
Fig.  21.  Effect  of  the  connectors  on  the  signal 
delivered by one of the gauge in a 50 mm diameter 
AE  Active  Element  CX 
We  have  shown  that  front  curvature  has  a 
pronounced  effect  on  the  response  of  embedded 
electromagnetic particle velocity gauges. However 
they  can  be  used  to  characterize  curved  flows  as 
soon as one takes into account the curvature of the 
flow in the data processing.  These results have led 
us  to  design  new  specific  gauges  for  curved 
detonation  front  characterization  consisting  only 
of  shock  trackers  aligned  on  the  same  reference 
line.  These  new  gauges  have  been  successfully 
tested  in  both  plane  initiation  and  curved  steady 
detonation conditions. A new numerical method to 
assess  the  response  of  the  gauges  in  multidimensional  reactive  flows  was  also  presented. 
Our  calculations  show 
participation  to  the  measurement  is  noticeable 
which  is  not  the  case  in  purely  1-D  flows.  It 
appears  to  be  a  very  effective  way  to  check  the 
predictions  of  various  reactive  burn  models  in 
multi-dimensional configurations.  
This work was performed in the frame of the 
International  Agreement  between  the  CEADAM 
and the NNSADP on Cooperation in Fundamental 
Science  Supporting  Stockpile  Stewardship.  Los 
Alamos National Laboratory is operated by LANS 
LLC  for  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy  and  the 
authors  acknowledge  support  by  DOENNSA. C. 
Rion  and  V.  Guyot  are  gratefully  acknowledged 
for their help in shot execution at CEA. We would 
like  to  thank  Ben  Schilling  and  Katey  Thomas  at 
LANL for assistance with data analysis Additional Calibration Data for the Large Scale Gap Test and Expanded Large Scale
Gerrit T. Sutherland Richard A. Benjamin Michael B. Zellner and Harold W. Sandusky
U.S. Army Research Laboratory Aberdeen Proving Ground MD 21005
Naval Surface Warfare Center Indian Head Explosive Ordnance Technology Division Indian Head MD
Abstract. Photonic Doppler velocimeter PDV experiments 1 allowed capture of additional gap test calibration data using the same test method for the large scale gap test
and the expanded large scale gap test LSGT and ELSGT. Data obtained included in-situ
particle velocity-time histories shock velocity-time histories and free surface velocitytime histories at the end of the Polymethylmethacrylate PMMA gap. The results show
that particle velocity measurements taken for the LSGT dimensionally scaled are in close
agreement with those of the ELSGT. Additionally the peak LSGT and ELSGT particle
velocity measurements are indistinguishable from each other and trend lower than those
obtained by Erkman et al. 2 using embedded electromagnetic particle velocity gauges.
Finally the LSGT shock velocity measurements are in agreement with those taken with a
streak camera by Tasker and Baker. 3 Additionally detonation prole experiments and
modied disk acceleration experiments MDAX were performed to characterize the output of the gap test Pentolite booster. Two of the detonation prole experiments were in
agreement with Erkman et al. and the MDAX experiments showed variations between
Gap tests 4 described below are used extensively to rank an explosives shock sensitivity. In addition gap test data can be used to obtain parameters for reactive rate model parameters for computer
simulations. 5 These simulations can be used to
predict the amount of reaction in an explosive when
the explosive is pressurized by a shock wave from
a stimulus such as sympathetic detonation or fragment impact. Often other types of data used to obtain these parameters such as POP-Plot curves or
embedded gauge pressure-time or particle velocity
time histories are not available. The focus of this
paper is to provide additional calibration data to improve accuracy of gap test simulations. 6 7
Features of Gap Testing
The typical gap test arrangement 4 see Figure 1 consists of a cylindrical Pentolite 50 weight
 TNT 50 weight  PETN explosive donor
charge which is attached to a Polymethylmethacrylate PMMA cylinder referred to as the gap. The
gap is composed of either a single cylinder or multiple PMMA cylinders. Attached to the PMMA is
a cylindrical acceptor explosive typically encased
in a steel tube. The PMMA serves to attenuate the
energy and peak pressure that is transferred into the
acceptor explosive. Below the acceptor explosive
is a small air gap and a steel plate. A full detonation in the acceptor explosive punches a clean hole
considered a GO in the steel plate. The test is performed multiple times to determine the maximum
gap thickness to achieve a GO. For a thickness
greater than the maximum gap thickness insufcient energy is imparted to the acceptor explosive to
cause a full detonation. Although there are a variety
of gap tests the two types discussed in this work are
the large-scale gap test LSGT and the expandedlarge scale gap test ELSGT with the key difference between the LSGT and the ELSGT being the
physical scale 1.875 X.
Existing Gap Test Calibration Curves
Gap test calibration curves specify the peak shock
wave pressure in the PMMA gap PG versus gap
thickness. The curves see Figure 2 used for the
LSGT and ELSGT have been obtained using two
different methods. For the LSGT Erkman et al.
2 obtained in-situ particle velocity time histories
in the gap from electromagnetic particle velocity
EMV gauges. A PMMA Hugoniot along with
the Rankine-Hugoniot jump conditions were used
to determine PG from peak particle velocity. For the
ELSGT Tasker and Baker 3 used a streak camera to obtain the shock wave position in the gap
as a function of time which was numerically differentiated for shock velocity. Again the RankineHugoniot jump conditions and same PMMA Hugoniot were used to determine PG as a function of
gap thickness. The calibration curves were also
expressed in terms of particle velocity versus gap
thickness 2 and shock velocity versus gap thickness. 3 Erkman et al. 2 also measured shock position as a function of time with a streak camera that
when converted to PG agreed with EMV gauge data
for a middle range of gaps. The technique was less
desirable because of have to differentiate the streak
camera data to obtain shock velocity which is then
less sensitive to changes in PG than are changes in
particle velocity. 2
Features and Limitations of Existing Gap Test Calibration Curves
One feature of the curves is that the LSGT and
ELSGT curves do not dimensionally scale. 6 8
If the calibrations did scale the LSGT and ELSGT
curves shown in Figure 2 would be coincident. Differences in the calibration curves could be due to
time-dependent PMMA viscosity effects 7 9 or
test technique. Differences include the method insitu EMV gauges versus streak camera the manufacturer of the Pentolite donor charge and the detonator used. J2 blasting caps were used for the LSGT
work and Teledyne RISI RP-80 exploding bridge
Gap LengthGap Diameter
Fig. 1. Schematic drawing of LSGT and ELSGT.
Fig. 2. LSGT and ELSGT calibration curves.
wire detonators for the ELSGT work. A J2 blasting cap is both more powerful and of a larger diameter than the RP-80 detonator. One possibility not
tested is that the point where the Pentolite donor
detonated was closer to the detonator in the LSGT
work due to the differences in Pentolite or detonator.
The differences in the point of detonation may have
affected how the energy is transfered to the PMMA
gap. Also the calibration curves 2 3 do not provide complete validation data as they provide only
peak pressures and not pressure-time histories at locations inside the gap. It is important that simulations predict the pressure-time or particle velocitytime histories accurately as the amount of reaction
in the gap test acceptor charge will be determined by
P udt and not peak pressure. In
the previous expression P is pressure u is particle
velocity and t is time. The purpose of this study is
to obtain particle velocity-time histories at various
PMMA gap thicknesses using the same technique
to better determine scaling between the LSGT and
ELSGT and to provide more complete gap test validation data for gap test simulations.
A Photonic Doppler Velocimeter PDV 1 was
used to measure in-situ velocity-time histories. Figure 3 shows a schematic drawing of the gap test calibration experiments. A PDV will measure multiple reections in the experiment the velocity of the
in-situ reective surface the velocity of free surface as some light is reected off of this surface
and the velocity of a moving reective surface created by a shock wave in the PMMA. The PDV was
manufactured by Third Millenium Engineering of
Plano Texas. Collimating probes with a 70-mm
working distance were manufactured by AC Photonics of Santa Clara CA. In most cases the diffuse reective surface was formed by a thin layer
of white paint. The experimental materials see gure 3 such as the Teledyne RISI RP-80 detonators
Pentolite pellets and PMMA gap were the same as
those presently being used to conduct the LSGT and
ELSGT at the U.S. Army Research Laboratory. In
the PDV data analysis a PMMA window correction suggested by Gustavson 10 of one 1 was
used. Other data 1014 suggest a window correc
tion 15 of 0.99 to 1.01 depending on the pressure
in the window. This implies a 1 percent uncertainty
in the particle velocity due to the uncertainty in the
window correction. Further details of the experiment appear in references 11 16
Additionally two other experiments were performed to assess the output of the the Pentolite
booster. In one set of experiments called detonation prole experiments 17 the PMMA window
was placed directly onto the output end the LSGT
booster pellets. These experiments provide information on the structure of the Pentolite detonation
wave just before it enters the PMMA. In the second set of experiments modied disc acceleration
experiments MDAX were performed. These are
similar to DAX experiments 18 19 but are larger
in charge diameter with a shorter length to diameter ratio. In these experiments a 95.25 mm diameter by 0.55 mm thick copper plate was placed onto
the output end of the ELSGT booster. The free surface velocity of the plate is measured with a PDV.
The action of the shock and release waves traveling through the copper plate result in a series of
steps. The total free surface velocity-time history
can be used to validate the Pentolite reactive equation of state EOS. Features of the rst step particle
velocity history in DAX 18 19 tests with longer
length over diameter ratios have been used to determine detonation pressure values. Both the detonation prole experiment and MDAX were designed
to provide validation data for hydrocode simulations
of just the Pentolite boosters. There is uncertainty in
the reactive EOSs for Pentolite at a density of 1.56
gcc because of not being validated with experimental data from cylinder expansion tests.
Results and Discussion
Types of Data Obtained
Figure 4 shows that the PDV technique provides
several measurements simultaneously. The left axis
displays the velocity and the right axis displays
the colors showing the spectral density decibels.
Higher spectral densities correspond to the signal
level from various relecting surfaces. The apparent
shock velocity history shows the velocity of a moving reective surface caused by a shock wave traveling in the PMMA window. This feature was ob
26
Interface In-situ Particle Velocity-Time Histories
Figures 5 - 7 illustrate general dimensional scaling of the ELSGT and LSGT results and the presence of viscoelastic effects at lower particle velocities. After shifting LSGT and ELSGT results to
a common starting time the LSGT results where
stretched in time by a factor of 1.875. The ELSGT
and scaled LSGT curves are generally coincident
with the degree of scaling varing depending on the
two particular expeiments at the same ratio scaled
distance of gap thickness to diameter xD. For example Figure 7 for XD of 0.37 does not scale compared to xD  1.25 in Figure 5 and xD  0.874 in
Figure 6. As shown below there was variablity in
the velocity results for replicate experiments at the
same xD which would mean that the degree of scaling would be affected by which experiments were
compared. Additional particle velocity-time histories appear in references 16 22.
In Figures 6 and 7 the particle velocity-time histories show features of PMMA viscoelastic effects
also seen in yer plate experiments. 12 The feature seen is a steep initial rise in particle velocity
too fast to be seen by the PDV and then a more
gradual rise to a peak particle velocity. As with the
yer plate experiments this studys results contain
viscous effects that become more pronounced for
weaker shocks. This suggests that gap test simulations should include a model that treats viscous
Peak Interface In-situ Velocity
Figures 8 and 9 show that the ELSGT and LSGT
curves are indistinguishable suggesting that one calibration curve would be appropriate for both. The
ELSGT 3 curve is a derived curve by converting
shock velocity versus distance data to particle velocity versus distance via Hugoniots given by Erkman et. al. 2 The curves also show the following
trends. First peak particle velocities tend to lie between the ELSGT and LSGT curves. Second at
longer scaled distances 0.5 - 1.25 the peak velocities from PDV measurements are approximately 5
percent lower that those predicted by the LSGT calibration derived from EMV gauge data. The differences could be due to variations in the ways the experiment were conducted PDV versus particle ve
Fig. 3. Schematic drawing of LSGT and ELSGT
calibration experiments.
served fully through the entire window thickness for
two LSGT experiments and intermittently through
the window thickness for several ELSGT experiments. Dividing the apparent shock velocity by the
index of refraction of PMMA 1.481 20 21 gives
the shock velocity. The in-situ or interface particle
velocity history begins with the peak particle velocity which can be compared with that measured by
Erkman et al. 2 The various free surface velocities
are most likely caused by PMMA ejecta traveling
at different velocities. The free surface velocity is
not twice the particle velocity because the free surface velocity was measured at a greater gap thickness than the the in-situ velocity. All three types of
velocity data can be used to validate gap test simulations.
Fig. 4. Spectrogram showing types of velocity histories obtained.
Fig. 7. ELSGT LSGT and Scaled LSGT data for
PMMA scaled distance xD 0.374 and 0.372 respectively.
in the peak particle velocity measured at the same
scaled distance. This can be seen in the points measured at a scaled distance of 0.5 where one outlier
datum showed a peak particle velocity which was
10 percent lower than that from the LSGT calibration curve. The authors of this paper are currently
performing additional analysis and hydrocode simulations to determine what effects could cause in the
peak interface velocities measured.
Gapcid3LengthGapcid3Diameter
ELSGTcid3Calibration
95cid3ofcid3LSGTcid3Calibration
Fig. 8. Peak LSGT and ELSGT interface velocities
for scaled distances xD from 0.0 to 0.8.
Fig. 5. ELSGT LSGT and Scaled LSGT data for
PMMA scaled distance xD of 1.250.
Fig. 6. ELSGT LSGT and Scaled LSGT data for
PMMA scaled distance xD of 0.874.
locity gauges or other such variables as the type of
detonator used. However two LSGT experiments
were performed at a scaled distance of 0.5 one with
a RP-80 normally used with 203 mg of explosive
and one with a RP-83 1111 mg of explosive detonator the peak velocities were almost identical. To
denitively prove that the type of detonator has no
effect more experiments are needed to look what
effects both detonator power and diameter have on
the initiation of Pentolite. Third there is variation
Gapcid3ThicknessGapcid3Diameter
Fig. 9. Peak LSGT and ELSGT interface velocities
for scaled distances xD from 0.7 to 1.3.
Shock Velocity Measurements
Limited results see Figure 10 suggest that shock
velocities measured for the LSGT by the PDV are
in agreement with ELSGT measurements of Tasker
and Baker. 3 Shock velocities were measured
in two LSGT experiments and partially in some
ELSGT experiments. The two LSGT experiments
shown were identical with the exception that one
experiment used an RP-80 detonator and the other
used a larger RP-83 detonator. To obtain the scaled
distance corresponding to each shock velocity datum the shock velocity-time history was integrated.
As seen in Figure 10 the LSGT results are within
2 of those of Tasker and Baker using the streak
camera technique. The partial ELSGT data 11 is
also in agreement with that of Tasker and Baker. It
is not known why a shock velocity history was obtained in only a few experiments.
Detonation Prole Experiments
The peak interface velocities see Figure 11 obtained for experiments 2 and 3 2718 and 2719
ms were in agreement with those predicted by
the LSGT calibration 2649 ms. 2 The records
are noisy with velocity ripples superimposed on
them possibly due to three factors. First the intensity of the reected laser beam was low in these experiments. Second Gustavasen 17 indicated these
features could be due to laser speckle from the dif
ELSGTcid3Calibration
98cid3ELSGTcid3Calibration
102cid3ELSGTcid3Calibration
Fig. 10. Shock velocity versus scaled distance for
fuse reecting surface. Finally Gustavasen also
indicated the ripples could be caused by the PDV
spot diameter which is close to the same length
scale as the explosive particles. The Pentolite boosters were made with detonation cord grade PETN
which would have a large particle diameter. For experiment 1 the peak velocity was less than experiments 2 or 3. It is not known if this is due to the
PDV signal being too weak to pick up the rst part
of the time history or reects shot to shot variations.
Modied Disc Acceleration Experiments
Figures 12 and 13 show that all three experiments
produced close to the same free surface velocity at
1 microsecond but there was variation in the step
height for the rst few steps between experiments.
Since a higher rst step height implies a higher detonation pressure 19 this would imply there was
a variation in Pentolite detonation pressure. The
agreement in free surface velocity at 1 microsecond
indicates the energy transfer to the copper plate varied little between experiment. The data could be
useful for gap test simulations as follows First different reactive equation of states EOSs could be
used until the simulations 19 predicted the velocity histories step heights and nal heights for each
Fig. 13. Free surface velocities from the MDAX
experiments. Time scale from Figure 12 is altered
to better show rst jumps in velocity.
The work presented in this paper shows the usefulness of the PDV technique in obtaining data for
gap test simulations as well as additional gap test
calibration data. Three types of measurements in
the PMMA gap data were obtained limited shock
velocity-time histories free surface velocity-time
histories and particle velocity-time histories.
In contrast to the published calibration curves for
the LSGT and ELSGT the data in this study show
that both tests generally scale dimensionally. First
scaled LSGT particle time histories are in agreement with ELSGT particle velocity time histories.
Second the obtained curves of peak velocity versus
scaled distance for the ELSGT and LSGT are indistinguishable. Finally shock velocity versus scaled
distance curves for the LSGT are in agreement with
published curves from the ELSGT calibration.
The measured peak interface velocity versus
scaled distance curves tended to lie between the
published LSGT and ELSGT calibrations. The experimental curve tended to be about 5 percent lower
than that predicted by LSGT calibration.
Also the output of the Pentolite booster system was characterized by detonation prole experi
2500
Fig. 11. Pentolite detonation proles. Results are
shifted in time to allow better comparisons.
experiment. Second the different EOSs could be
used in simulations of the booster and PMMA gap.
Finally comparison of results would allow estimations of how a variation in Pentolite would result in
variations in the particle velocity in the PMMA gap.
Fig. 12. Free surface velocities from the MDAX
ments and a modied disk acceleration experiment
MDAX. The peak particle velocities for two of
three experiments were in agreement with those of
the LSGT calibration. For the MDAX the data
showed some variation in the height of the rst step
which indicates a difference in Pentolite CJ pressures between experiments. The agreement in later
time velocities indicates that energy provided to the
copper plate was similar for each experiment.
The data will be useful to validate hydrocode
simulations of the gap test. First detonation prole experiments and modied Dynamic Acceleration experiments can be used to validate the part of
the simulation involving the Pentolite booster. Second the particle velocity histories can be used to
validate the simulation involving the booster and
In particular the proles showing
viscous behavior can be used to validate simulations incorporating a viscous material model. Finally simulations involving the measured variations
in the MDAX can be used to assess how variations
in the Pentolite booster affect particle velocities inSurvivability of Explosives with Dynamically Collapsing Cavities 
Harold W. Sandusky Richard H. Granholm and Joshua E. Felts 
Naval Surface Warfare Center Indian Head EOD Technology Division 
Indian Head MD 20640-5035 
Abstract. Threshold and violence of reaction in explosives containing cavities or adjacent 
gaps were determined for compressive loads ranging from setback in a gun projectile to 
supersonic penetration into a hardened target.  Cylindrical samples were heavily confined 
except  for  a  moveable  piston  on  one  end.    Piston  and  sample  pressures  were  always 
measured  along  with  piston  motion  in  several  experiments  to  follow  cavity  collapse.  
With a 12.7-mm diameter by 6.3-mm deep cylindrical cavity in the sample few of the 38 
explosives examined survived at the higher loading rates.  Usually a cast-cure or softer 
pressed explosive would deform without internal damage and the reaction was mild and 
extinguished  before  consuming  much  of  the  sample.    Melt-cast  and  the  harder  pressed 
explosives fracture suddenly and more vigorously react because of the additional surface 
area  sometimes  even  exploding.    Reaction  threshold  and  violence  depended  on  the 
energetic ingredients and their particle size but also on mechanical properties related to 
the type of binder and fill density.   
A number of operational and hazard scenarios 
involve  pressure-time  p-t  loadings  from  tens  of 
microseconds to milliseconds with peaks of tenths 
of a GPa.  One example is the inertial loading near 
the bottom of the explosive fill in a gun projectile 
as it accelerates down a barrel which is referred to 
as  gun  setback  and  discussed 
Detonation  Symposia.1-3    Other  examples  involve 
impact  such  as  falling  munitions  or  the  inertial 
loading  in  the  explosive  fill  near  the  nose  of  a 
warhead as it penetrates a barrier.  Such loadings 
are  well  below  the  threshold  for  shock  initiation 
but  dynamic  collapse  of  any  internal  cavity  can 
cause  ignition  possibly  developing  into  violent 
reaction.  Cavities are common and include casting 
voids  open  cracks  from  aging  and 
cycling  and  air  gaps  at  interfaces  with  the 
confinement.  Since models for predicting ignition 
are  unavailable  and  full-scale  tests  are  both 
expensive  and  difficult  to  instrument  simulators 
have been used to replicate the p-t loading within 
the area of interest that contains the cavity.   
For  a  fill  without  friction  within  a  canister 
being  accelerated  along  its  axis  a  simplified  gun 
projectile  quasi-steady  p    fill  density     
acceleration  a    fill  depth  h.    In  one  127-mm 
gun  projectile  for  example  maximum  p  pmax   
88 MPa at the bottom of the fill after 6.2 ms for an 
average loading rate dpdt of 14.2 MPams.  The 
simulator  that  replicates  this  and  higher  loadings 
was used to screen explosives for survivability and 
elucidate reaction mechanisms for future models.   
Experimental Technique  
A  simplified  depiction  of  the  apparatus  is 
presented in Figure 1.  In this radially symmetric 
arrangement  the  25.4-mm  diameter  by  21.2-mm 
long  sample  with  a  mass  of  20  g  is  laterally 
confined  in  a  thick-wall  tube  and  loaded  on  one 
end by a piston while restrained on the other end 
by an anvil.  Reaction requires a cavity which is 
usually in the end of the sample next to the piston 
and  cylindrical  in  shape.    This  corresponds  to  a 
partial base gap whereas a full base gap occurs by 
separating the piston and sample.  A casting void 
is simulated by a hemispherical cavity next to the 
piston or by a spherical cavity in the center of a 
split sample with a hemisphere cut into each half.  
For  explosives  that  often  contain  voids  in  close 
proximity  two  cylindrical  cavities  of  different 
diameters can be used to create an avalanche effect 
from the collapse of the larger one increasing the 
loading  on  the  smaller  one.    Some  cast-cure 
samples  had  cavities  cast  into  them  but  most 
cavities were cut occasionally with the cut surface 
resealed by binder or paint.  Instead of a cavity in 
the  sample  a  cavity  in  the  piston  simulates  a 
defect in the confinement.   
Sample with Cylindrical Cavity 
Fig. 1. Simplified apparatus. 
The piston is pressurized by combusting a ball 
propellant in the driver section that inserts into the 
confinement tube.  These components are clamped 
between plates by hardened bolts as shown on the 
schematic  of  the  complete  apparatus  in  Figure  2.  
Pressure on the piston increases until a burst disk 
in the driver section fails and vents the propellant 
products.    Driving  pressure  on  the  piston  and 
sample pressure on the anvil are measured in each 
collapse and bulk compression of the sample was 
measured by photography of circumferential scribe 
lines on the piston through an enlarged vent hole 
in the confinement tube. 
Hardened Bolt 4 19-mm Diameter 
Fig. 2. NSWC setback simulator apparatus. 
The  p-t  history  of  the  driver  is  controlled  by 
type of ignitor amount and type of ball propellant 
burst  disk  thickness  and  vent  diameter.    The 
lowest  1X  p-t  loading  rate  is  an  average  16.5 
MPams to a pmax of 83 MPa similar to a 127-mm 
gun.    Higher  p-t  loadings  in  part  achieved  by 
higher pmax are expressed as multiples of dpdt for 
a 1X loading.  Loading histories from 1X to 50X 
are  displayed  in  Figure  3.    These  have  an  initial 
jump  in  pressure  from  rupturing  a  stainless  steel 
cup containing the ignitor mix and all vent in 6 
ms.    Sometimes  the  ignitor  is  without  a  cup  to 
achieve  a  soft  start.    The  highest  200X  p-t 
loading is 1.8 to 3.7 GPams to a peak of 370 MPa.   
Fig. 3. p-t histories from 1X to 50X. 
Reaction violence when the cavity is adjacent 
to the piston face is distinguished by damage to the 
apparatus as well as by a pressure excursion at the 
anvil.  Air and any decomposition gases within a 
cavity are sealed by the piston pressing against the 
sample until exceeded by reaction pressure.  Then 
burning products leak past the piston head to vents 
tube  and  begin  eroding 
increased  clearance  between  the  piston  head  and 
tube  until  venting  exceeds  gas 
generation.  The pressure drop extinguishes further 
burning  and  most  of  the  sample  is  recovered.    A 
deflagration  generates  gas  too  quickly  to  be 
relieved by leakage and the piston is forced back 
into the powder chamber in the driver section until 
the  vents  in  the  confinement  tube  are  uncovered.  
Some sample is usually recovered.  An explosion 
destroys the entire apparatus.   
The 38 explosives examined include cast-cure 
melt-cast  and  pressed  compositions  with  a  wide 
range  of  ingredients.    Cast-cure  and  melt-cast 
samples were usually obtained by casting to size in 
a mold but sometimes by casting oversize and then 
machining.  Cast-cure samples were also plug cut 
from  slabs.    Sample  diameters  by  these  methods 
are not as controlled as when pressed varying by 
0.3  mm.    The  inner  diameter  of  confinement 
tubes were  sized  for  a  sliding  fit of  each sample.  
Matching  pistons  and  anvils  had  a  clearance  of 
0.025  mm  in  the  confinement  tube  to  maintain 
alignment and limit sample extrusion past them.   
variations  in  technique  other  than  those  listed 
above.  While reaction requires a cavity of at least 
several millimeters it was verified that no reaction 
occurred without a cavity or with only higher than 
normal  porosity.    The  cavity  was  usually  filled 
with  air  but  also  evacuated  to  eliminate  heating 
from adiabatic compression of entrapped air.  Most 
experiments  involve  a  single  loading  of  the 
sample  but  recovered  samples  for  one  explosive 
were  reloaded  after  assessing  initial  damage  to 
replicate  the  repeated  cycle  that  occurs  when  a 
suddenly loaded explosive responds like a spring.  
The apparatus was usually at ambient temperature 
but  cooled  to  as  low  as  -40oC  to  determine  any 
changes to reaction threshold or violence.   
The  threshold  of  reaction  depended  upon 
ingredients including the particle size of explosive 
crystals.  Violence of reaction however was most 
affected  by  mechanical  properties  such  as 
hardness  and  brittleness  that  determined  how 
easily a cavity could collapse and whether or not 
the  sample  fractured  for  increasing  the  exposed 
surface  area.    Softer  usually  cast-cure  plastic 
bonded  explosives  PBXs  but  also  some  pressed 
PBXs  generally  had  mild  responses  while  the 
harder pressed and melt-cast explosives had more 
vigorous responses.    
Cast-Cure Explosives 
These explosives have rubber-like binders that 
are  deformable  by  finger  pressure  and  cavities 
collapse just from the initial pulse when the ignitor 
cup ruptures.  This is illustrated in Figure 4 for an 
a  12.7-mm  diameter 
hemispherical cavity subjected to a 2X p-t loading.  
Assuming  no  ullage  for  the  sliding  fit  of  the 
sample  in  the  confinement  tube  the  piston  will 
move  1.04  mm  to  collapse  the  cavity.    This 
occurred  within  0.28  ms  simultaneously  with  the 
ignitor pulse followed by slower motion from bulk 
compression until pmax.  At pmax the anvil pressure 
usually  exceeds  that  for  the  driver  as  forward 
piston  motion  stops  and  anvil  pressure  often 
remains  higher  during  venting  because  of  wall 
friction restraining sample relaxation.    
 Fig.  4.  Pressures  and  piston  displacement  during 
2X p-t loading on a cast-cure simulant with a 12.7mm diameter hemispherical cavity next to piston. 
Upon  release  of  pressure  most  cast-cure 
samples rebounded without internal damage if no 
reaction  occurred  as  shown  in  Figure  5  for  a 
sample  with  a  large  cylindrical  cavity  that  was 
sectioned after a 200X p-t loading.  This sample 
cyclotetramethylenetetranitramine  HMX  in  a  hydroxyl-terminated 
polybutadiene  HTPB  binder  exhibited  only 
slight  discoloration  from  pyrolysis  within  the 
cavity.  A formulation with very coarse HMX will 
react from a 1X p-t loading even with a shallower 
4.6-mm deep cavity in the sample as illustrated in 
Figure 6.  Only the annulus around the cavity and 
the cavity itself had surface burning indicating no 
cracks  emanating  from  the  cavity  for  a  flame  to 
propagate into.  The p-t history for this experiment 
in  Figure  7  shows  some  oscillations  in  anvil 
pressure  just  after  pmax  that  may  be  faltering 
ignition  which  finally  occurred  when  driver 
pressure had vented to less than half of pmax.   
Fig.  5.  Cross-section  of  cast-cure  sample  with  a 
12.7-mm  diameter  by  8.6-mm  deep  cylindrical 
cavity that did not react from a 200X p-t loading.  
Fig. 7. Pressure traces from the 1X p-t loading for 
the recovered sample in Figure 6.  
Ignition  of  cast-cure  samples  was  always 
delayed  with  respect  to  cavity  collapse  often 
several milliseconds after pmax but as late as 24 ms 
when  the  driver  pressure  was  fully  vented.    A 
longer  ignition  delay  approached  the  threshold of 
reaction  usually  achieved  by  reducing  cavity 
depth  or  p-t  loading  until  reaction  failed.    That 
delay  if  reaction  occurred  was  also  affected  by 
ignition  of  the  driver  propellant.    If  a  1X  p-t 
loading had a soft start which is shown in Figure 8 
with  the  trace  in  Figure  7  for  a  standard  ignitor 
sample  reaction  for  the  same  explosive  with  an 
equivalent cavity occurred sooner 1 ms after pmax 
as compared 4 ms after pmax in Figure 7.   
Fig.  6.  Cross-section  of  another  cast-cure  sample 
with  a  12.7-mm  diameter  by  4.6-mm  deep  cavity 
that reacted from a 1X p-t loading.   
Fig.  8.  Comparison  of  1X  p-t  loading  from 
standard ignitor same driver trace in Figure 7 and 
soft ignitor with trace shifted to match pmax. 
The  ignition  threshold  was  somewhat  higher 
for  a  cylindrical  cavity  in  the  piston  of  the  same 
size  as  one  in  the  sample  but  not  significantly 
different  for  a  cylindrical  or  hemispherical  cavity 
of the same depth in the sample.  Most explosives 
containing coarse Class 1 or very coarse Classes 
3 and 4 filler particles in both inert and energetic 
binders reacted from a 1X p-t loading for a 12.7mm diameter by 6.4-mm deep cavity.  Aluminum 
particles  probably  by  dilution  of  explosive 
ingredients and as heat sinks tended to desensitize 
formulations.    One  formulation  with  both  coarse 
cyclotrimethylene-trinitramine RDX and 200 m 
particles  of  ammonium  perchlorate  AP  in  an 
HTPB  binder  reacted  at  a  1X  p-t  loading  from  a 
6.4-mm  diameter  hemispherical  cavity  much 
smaller than the ones in Figures 5 and 6.  Reaction 
failed for a 3.2-mm diameter hemispherical cavity 
with  dislodged  crystals  as  large  as  380  m 
remaining in the cavity Figure 9.    
Fig.  9.  Dislodged  crystals  in  a  3.2-mm  diameter 
hemispherical cavity after 1X p-t loading.   
When  coating  the  cavity  surface  for  the 
formulation in Figure 9 with HTPB that cured the 
only decomposition for a larger 12.7-mm diameter 
hemi-spherical  cavity  was  char  spots  around 
crystals  under  the  transparent  coating  at  a  much 
higher 10X p-t loading.  Another formulation with 
only coarse RDX also reacted at a 1X p-t loading 
for a 6.4-mm diameter cleanly cut hemispherical 
cavity and was similarly desensitized by an HTPB 
coating at a 10X p-t loading.  The HTPB coating 
was more effective than an as-cast cavity with the 
usual HTPB-rich surface which still reacted for a 
6.4-mm  diameter  hemispherical  cavity  although 
the extent of decomposition was limited to 45 mg 
or less versus  g for a cut cavity.  The reaction 
threshold  was  unaffected  by  using  three  different 
types of RDX in this formulation in contrast to a 
factor of two change in critical pressure for shock 
initiation in gap tests.   
Upon  ignition  the  rate  of  pressure  buildup 
from  burning  in  cast-cure  PBXs  containing  a 
cavity  at  or  in  the  piston  was  usually  about  that 
shown in Figure 7.  When leakage past the piston 
is blocked such as a spherical cavity in the center 
of a sample ignition occurs before pmax and rising 
pressures  force  the  piston  back  into  the  driver 
section until the vents in the confinement tube are 
  The  one  exception  to  the  mild 
response  of  cast-cure  PBXs  was  a  formulation 
with  a  lauryl  methacrylate  binder  that  sustained 
internal  damage  and  did  not  rebound  upon 
unloading.    The  photograph  in  Figure  10  of  a 
sectioned sample with a 12.7-mm diameter by 4.6mm deep cylindrical cavity after a 1X p-t loading 
is more like that for a Teflon sample in Figure 11 
that  was  quasi-statically  loaded.    Both  show  the 
bottom  and  top  edge  of  the  cavity  deforming 
inwards.  When the cavity depth was increased to 
6.1  mm  for  the  same  1X  p-t  loading  cracks 
appeared  below  the  deformed  cavity  Figure  12.  
A  shallower  3.2-mm  deep  cavity 
formulation  exploded  in  replicated  experiments 
with  a  2X  p-t  loading  before  pmax  at  the  same 
driver pressure of 156 MPa.  The explosions were 
most likely from flame propagation into cracks. 
Fig. 10. Cross-section of recovered sample with a 
12.7-mm diameter by 4.6-mm deep cavity that did 
not rebound from a 1X p-t loading. 
Fig.  11.  Cross-section  of  a  Teflon  sample  with  a 
12.7-mm  diameter  by  6.4-mm  deep  cylindrical 
cavity after quasi-static loading. 
Fig. 13. Cross-section of a recovered pressed PBX 
sample  with  soft  binder  after  deformation  into  a 
15.9-mm  diameter  by  6.3-mm  deep  cylindrical 
cavity in the piston by a 2X p-t loading.  
Fig.  12.  Cross-section  of  sample  from  same 
formulation  as  in  Figure  10  but  with  a  6.1-mm 
deep cavity that cracked from a 1X p-t loading.  
Because  these  explosives  have  about  half  as 
much binder as a cast-cure PBX even a soft binder 
produces a stiff but deformable formulation.  Other 
binders  such  as  Viton  or  Kel-F  result 
formulations that are hard and brittle.  An example 
of  the  former  in  Figure  13  shows  no  internal 
damage  from  nearly  complete  extrusion  of  the 
sample into a 15.9-mm diameter by 6.3-mm deep 
Deformation  occurred 
instead  of  promptly  by  the  ignitor  pulse.    The 
closed  cylindrical  sample  cavity  in  Figure  14  is 
similar  to  that  in  Figure  10  for  a  stiff  cast-cure 
PBX.    When  ignition  occurred  it  was  also  after 
pmax  with  burning  along  gaps  between  deformed 
surfaces as shown in Figure 15.   
the  piston  by  a  2X  p-t 
Fig. 14. Cross-section of a recovered pressed PBX 
sample  with  soft  binder  and  a  12.7-mm  diameter 
by 4.8-mm deep cavity by a 1X p-t loading. 
Fig. 15. Cross-section of a recovered pressed PBX 
sample  with  soft  binder  and  a  12.7-mm  diameter 
by 3.2-mm deep cavity after reaction from a 2X p-t 
Applying  a  polyurethane  paint  on  the  cavity 
end  of  samples  for  one  pressed  PBX  with  a  soft 
binder increased the reaction threshold but not to 
the extent that the binder coating had for cast-cure 
PBXs.  Because of brush marks in the paint a thin 
coat  of  vacuum  grease  was  also  applied  on  the 
annulus  around  the  cavity  to  reduce  air  leakage 
from  the  collapsing  cavity.    This  leakage  only 
slightly  increased  the  reaction  threshold  whereas 
from  as-cut  cavities 
prevented reaction until a 50X p-t loading.  
Cavities  in  pressed  PBXs  with  hard  binders 
collapsed  suddenly  nearer  pmax  than  the  ignitor 
pulse followed usually by prompt reaction Figure 
16 unless formulated with insensitive ingredients.  
This  will  be  shown  to  also  describe  melt-cast 
formulations.  In Figure 16 there is a pressure drop 
on the anvil trace associated with cavity collapse at 
133  MPa  and  then  an  immediate  increase  in 
pressure  from  reaction  which  was  a  deflagration 
consuming  the  entire  sample.    The  rapidly  rising 
driver pressure after ignition was from forcing the 
piston into the driver section. 
Onset of Cavity Collapse
Fig. 16. Pressure traces from the 2X p-t loading of 
a hard pressed PBX with a 12.7-mm diameter by 
6.2-mm deep cylindrical cavity with deflagration.  
In  addition  to  elevated  anvil  pressure  when 
samples  reacted  there  was  a  distinct  change  in 
appearance  of  recovered  samples  for  all  types  of 
explosives  upon  crossing  the  reaction  threshold.  
Prior  to  ignition  there  was  often  only  a  little 
darkening from decomposition along with a mass 
loss  of  milligrams  mostly  from  the  recovery 
process  but  upon  ignition  there  was  surface 
regression and at least a  g of mass loss.  Several 
insensitive ingredients that resisted reaction most 
135-triamino-246-trinitrobenzene 
TATB  and  3-nitro-124-triazol-5-one  NTO 
would undergo  significant  pyrolysis  in  the  closed 
cavity  without  ignition  of  surrounding  sample.  
These  compositions  were  hard  and  the  energy 
dissipated  in  closing  the  cavity  would  char  the 
explosive  as  shown  in  Figure  17  for  a  TATBbased  composition  with  tens  of  milligrams  of 
Fig.  17.  End  of  TATB-based  explosive  sample 
with  12.7-mm  diameter  by  6.1-mm  deep  cavity 
closed with a central zone of char. 
The  only  experiments  with  base  gaps  in 
which there is heating from adiabatic compression 
of  air  without  sample  deformation  were  on  a 
pressed  PBX  with  a  soft  binder.    An  air  gap  of 
uniform  thickness  was  created  by  shortening  the 
usual sample length.  In this arrangement O-rings 
are added to the piston head and anvil to avoid loss 
of compressed air.  With there being no resistance 
from  sample  deformation  the  moving  piston 
continues  to  pressurize  the  air  beyond  the  driver 
pressure  until  the  piston  is  arrested.    With  every 
pressure spike in the air gap the piston is pushed 
back until the driver accelerates it again toward the 
sample.  This  process continues periodically with 
damping as illustrated in Fig. 18 for a sample that 
ignited after pmax.   
Fig. 18. Pressure traces for a 4X p-t loading on a 
sealed sample with a 2.9-mm base gap.    
Melt-Cast Explosives 
The  melted  ingredient  was  trinitrotoluene 
Composition  B  and  aluminum  in  tritonal  or  24dinitroanisole  DNAN  in  two  new  formulations 
for  insensitive  munitions.    All  formulations  were 
hard  with  sudden  cavity  collapse  that  if  no 
reaction occurred completely filled the cavity.   
One batch of TNT samples examined a decade 
ago  had  a  slight  tilt  of  their  ends  relative  to  the 
axis  allowing  air  to  escape  during  the  onset  of 
cavity  closure.    Recent  experiments  on  a  second 
batch had machined samples with ends normal to 
the axis as well as a thin coat of vacuum grease on 
the  annulus  around  the  cavity  that  contacts  the 
piston  to  ensure  sealing  of  entrapped  air.    If  the 
TNT had a homogeneous appearance no reaction 
occurred for a 12.7-mm diameter by 6.4 mm deep 
cylindrical  cavity  until  deflagration  of  the  entire 
sample  at  a  10X  p-t  loading  whether  or  not  the 
sample  end  was  tilted.    The  pressure  traces  in 
Figure 19 from a 4X p-t loading on a sample with 
a  flat  end  have  a  substantial  spike  at  the  end  of 
cavity collapse when the piston can only compress 
the  sample.    TNT  with  a  crystalline  appearance 
was  more  sensitive  deflagrating  at  a  4X  p-t 
loading  with most  of  the  sample  consumed.   The 
pressure traces in Figure 20 for this experiment are 
similar  to  those  in  Figure  16  for  a  hard  pressed 
PBX except that ignition was delayed.     
Fig.  19.    Pressure  traces  for  a  4X  p-t  loading  on 
homogeneous  TNT  with  a  12.7-mm  diameter  by 
6.3-mm deep cylindrical cavity that did not react.   
Fig.  20.    Pressure  traces  for  a  4X  p-t  loading  on 
crystalline TNT with a 12.7-mm diameter by 6.4mm deep cylindrical cavity that deflagrated.   
Composition  B  Comp  B  samples  examined 
ten  years  ago  also  had  a  slight  tilt  of  the  sample 
end and did not react until a 10X p-t loading on a 
sample with a 12.7-mm diameter by 4.8-mm deep 
cavity.  When the cavity suddenly collapsed at 85 
MPa the sample immediately exploded.  In recent 
experiments on another batch without tilted ends 
an explosion occurred 0.25 ms after collapse of a 
12.7-mm  diameter  by  3.2-mm  deep  cavity  at  70 
MPa when subjected to a 1X p-t loading.  Unlike 
TNT the initial sealing of cavities made Comp B 
much  more  sensitive.    Smaller  cavities  in  this 
batch of Comp B could collapse just as quickly at 
86  MPa  without  reaction  as  shown  for  a  sample 
with a 7.9-mm diameter by 6.3-mm deep cavity in 
Figure 21.  When reaction occurred in Comp B it 
was always an explosion.  
Fig.  21.  Pressure  traces  for  a  1X  p-t  loading  on 
Comp B with a 7.9-mm diameter by 6.3-mm deep 
cavity that suddenly collapsed without reaction.  
Tritonal  did  not  react  until  a  4X  p-t  loading 
for the same cavity size in Figure 20 for crystalline 
TNT.    There  were  no  direct  comparisons  for 
formulations with DNAN as the melted ingredient 
but  insensitive  fillers  resulted  in  burns  while 
inclusion of RDX resulted in deflagrations.   
With  a  cavity  explosive  deformation  is  the 
driver  for  igniting  reaction  by  potentially  several 
processes  heating from localized shear ejection 
of  filler  crystals  from  surfaces  impact  of  those 
crystals  upon  completion  of  cavity  closure  and 
adiabatic heating of compressed gas in the cavity.  
mechanism  in  cast-cure  PBXs  that  elastically 
rebounded without internal damage in soft pressed 
PBXs that were simply reformed without localized 
damage  and  even  in  melt-cast  explosives  with 
localized  heating  limited  by  melting  to  reform 
  Localized  shear  more  likely 
contributed  to  reaction  in  hard  explosives  where 
the cavity suddenly collapsed but at the same time 
there was compressive heating of air in the cavity 
and impact of any crystals ejected from the surface 
Figure  9.    There  was  pyrolysis  of  even  crystals 
entrapped under a layer of binder from impacting 
the piston and any heat transfer through that layer 
from heated air in the collapsed cavity.   
Adiabatic  compression  of  air  in  a  collapsing 
cavity  is  potentially  hot  enough  to  ignite  the 
adjacent explosive.  A 12.7-mm diameter  by 6.4mm  deep  cylindrical  cavity  one  of  the  largest  in 
this  study  has  a  volume  of  0.80  cc  and  contains 
0.95  mg  of  air.    If  that  cavity  is  adiabatically 
collapsed  to  1  of  its  original  volume  the 
pressure  and  temperature  increase  to  64  MPa 
almost  a  1X  p-t  loading  and  1850oK  with  a 
change in internal energy of 1.57 J.  Such a high 
temperature  is  never  realized  because  of  heat 
surrounding explosive and the piston if the cavity 
adjoins  it.    Even  a  fraction  of  the  heat  energy  is 
still significant because of being concentrated by a 
shrinking  cavity  especially  if  there  are  loose 
crystals.    A  capacitor  energy  of  0.037  to  0.165  J 
ignites  Class  1  RDX  powder  but  several  Joules 
are required to ignite that same powder in a binder.  
When the contribution of adiabatic heating is 
eliminated  by  evacuating  all  air  from  the  cavity 
achieving  reaction  required  a  much  higher  p-t 
loading for the same cavity size.  Air leakage from 
the  closing  cavity  whether  the  sample  end  was 
tilted  or  from  brush  marks 
polyurethane on the sample required a somewhat 
higher p-t loading for reaction.  Anytime a cavity 
quickly  closes  during 
resistance suddenly increases and arrests the piston 
motion  which  then  momentarily  rebounds  to 
allow some gas leakage.  This is probably why the 
initial  pulse  from  a  standard  ignitor  elevated  the 
reaction threshold relative to a soft ignitor Figure 
8.  While the apparatus was purposely designed to 
allow leakage for distinguishing reaction violence 
munitions will also have leakage paths.   
With  a  base  gap  the  only  viable  mechanism 
was adiabatic heating of the air.  A single thermal 
pulse  to  the  explosive  surface  with  the  crystals 
embedded  would  not  seem  sufficient  to  ignite 
them  but  there  were  repeated  thermal  pulses 
Figure  18  due  to  the  dynamic  response  of  the 
apparatus and the explosive was as sensitive as a 
cavity of the same depth.  Although these repeated 
pulses  are  an  artifact  it  was  calculated4  that  an 
explosive  fill  without  wall  friction  in  a  projectile 
has similar pressure pulses due to its dynamics.   
The  contribution  of  compressed  air  is  more 
than  providing  heat  during  base  gap  or  cavity 
closure.    The  combined  pressure  of  the  air  and 
initial  decomposition  products  for  the  explosive 
accelerate its reaction rate.   
Reactions  in  soft  pressed  and  most  cast-cure 
PBXs  were delayed  from  the  binder  around  filler 
crystals except for those ejected from the surface.  
Soft pressed PBXs even with half the amount of 
binder as cast-cure PBXs were no more sensitive 
probably because of better binder adhesion to the 
  When  ignition  occurred  there  was 
burning  because  of  the  time  required  to  spread 
from  one  crystal  to  another.    With  catastrophic 
cavity collapse in the harder pressed and melt-cast 
explosives  there  were  many  crystals  exposed  by 
explosions.  Also formulations with larger crystals 
provide  more  energy  1  J  for  a  500  m  RDX 
crystal versus 1 mJ for a 50 m crystal to ignite 
adjacent crystals.  Class 5 HMX crystals in binder 
were  very  insensitive  compared  to  the  2  mm 
RDX crystals in Comp B.   
Other  simulators1-3  had  different  p-t  loadings 
and  less  consistency.    The  explosive  responses 
were however similar with extensive burning for 
TNT  explosions  for  Comp  B  mild  reactions  for 
cast-cure  PBXs  and  little  decomposition  for 
TATB-based explosives.   
Summary and Conclusions 
A simulator was developed for replicating the 
inertial  loadings  from  sudden  accelerations  or 
decelerations  of  explosive  fills  in  munitions.  
the  apparatus  coupled 
Simulating  the  dynamic  load  on  a  25.4-mm 
diameter  explosive  sample  with  a  cavity  or  base 
gap  is  conceptually  simple  but  influenced  by  the 
mechanical  properties  of  the  explosives.    Similar 
complexity exists in actual munitions.  The setback 
simulator  provided  repeatable  loading  rate  peak 
pressure and unloading and consistent results for 
reaction threshold and violence.   
Whether or not a collapsing defect ignites the 
sample depends on its size and rate at which it is 
collapsed  the  ease  of  deformation  the  condition 
of  the  cavity  surface  and  the  filler  particle  size.  
The  ability  of  a  cavity  surface  to  entrap  or  bind 
energetic crystals during its collapse small crystal 
size  and  a  non-cracking  binder  all  contribute  to 
insensitivity.    Impact  of  coarse  energetic  crystals 
ejected from the surface during the collapse of an 
air-filled cavity along with adiabatic heating from 
entrapped  air  appears  to  be  the  mechanism  for 
deformable  explosives.    Hard  explosives  are  also 
heated  by  shear  deformation  and  fracture  of  the 
sample  creates  additional 
increasing the reaction violence.   A hypothesis for the mechanism of insensitivity in TATB
Bryan F. Henson Laura B. Smilowitz Alan M. Novak David M. Oschwald
Matthew D. Holmes and Eva V. Baca
Chemistry and Weapons Experiments Divisions
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM USA
Abstract. We have studied the evolution of thermal explosions in TATB 135triamino-246-trinitrobenzene  based 
understanding the mechanisms of behavior that determine the overall description 
of  insensitivity  for  this  material.    A  significant  component  of  this  work  is  to 
determine the possibility of generating convective burning a necessary first step 
toward a  deflagration  to  detonation  transition  DDT or  understand  what 
precludes  it.  We  have  investigated  low  density  samples  of  TATB  thermal 
explosions  with  a  suite  of  diagnostics  including  temperature  density  and 
pressure. These have been used on TATB thermal explosion experiments with a 
range  of  initial  starting  densities.  TATB  has  shown  slow  laminar  internal 
burning  at  all  but 
lowest  densities  which  may  exhibit  a  more 
deconsolidative behavior. Cracking and steady propagation are observed at the 
lowest  densities  studied  for  which  laminar  burning  obtained  1.55 gcc. 
Deconsolidative and qualitatively faster response has recently been observed at 
densities  below  1.30  gcc.  We  use  our  understanding  of  the  mechanism  of 
octahydro-1357-tetranitro-1357-tetrazocine
formulations to inform us about TATB deflagration. We will also consider the 
thermal stability and pressurization as additional components of the mechanism 
of  insensitivity. We  will  not  consider  here  the  generation  of  temperature  by 
impact  although  we  are  presenting  the  tools  to  assess  the  thermal  response to 
this heating if it is known.
controversial  since  its  inception.    For  practical 
purposes  we  will  use  it  in  this  work  as  that 
component of the thermal response of the material
that  tends  to  make  ignition  and  burning  at  high 
rates  of  energy  release  more  difficult  or  less 
energetic  than  more  sensitive  explosives e.g.
HMX. It has been typically defined as that which 
TATB does that is better in this respect than other 
materials.  Insensitivity  however  like  the  term 
violence has always been ambiguous and without 
a  strong  scientific  underpinning.    For  instance 
something like 75 of the current tests to evaluate 
insensitivity  are  actually  tests  of  the  heat  that  is
necessarily  differences  in  the  chemical  response.
In  this  paper  we  will  consider  three  different 
mechanistic descriptions of the response of TATB 
and  TATB  formulations  which  may  begin  to 
the  mechanistic  definition  of  an 
insensitive  material. We  will  conclude  with 
specific  results  of  this  work  pertinent  to  the 
evaluation  of  whether  a  TATB  based  explosive 
formulation can undergo DDT.
Mechanisms of Thermal Insensitivity
We  will  consider  three  components  of  the 
thermal response of TATB here and examine their 
contribution  to  the  overall  insensitive  response  of 
this  material.  The  first  is  the  high  temperatures 
necessary for ignition. These can be explained by a 
new  representation  of  the  solid  decomposition 
mechanism  whose  thermally  activated  rate  is 
governed  by  the  solid  and  liquid  free  energies  of 
the  system.  The  second  are  processes  which 
determine the gas and solid temperatures achieved 
at the location of ignition. The solid decomposition 
of TATB to  form  gas  phase  species  has been 
observed in a number of laboratories.  Among the 
typical  gas  phase  product  species  identified  are 
HCN  NO2  NO  and  H2O.    These  species  are 
prominent  in the  high  temperature  oxidation  of 
HCN following a key isomerization reaction.  This 
propellant combustion and this reaction system has 
been  extensively  studied experimentally  and 
computationally.1 2 We  will  present  radiometric 
generated by this chemistry at ignition.  The third 
mechanism  considered  is  the  gas  phase  pressure 
  We  will  present 
measurements  of  internal  burning  rates  and  case 
behavior  to  infer  these  pressures.  These  three
components  to  the  decomposition  mechanism  are 
described in detail below and ultimately linked to 
TABLE 1. Rate constant parameters.
the  chemistry  of  brightzone  burning 
the dynamic initial conditions required for DDT.
Thermal Ignition Model
This first component of insensitivity in TATB 
is the elevated temperatures necessary for ignition. 
We  have  recently  produced  a  global  chemistry 
model  of  thermal  ignition3 and  melt  acceleration 
for  a  number  of  secondary  explosives  including 
TATB.4 The  unique  feature  of  this  model  is  the 
cyclic  mechanism  of 
solid  decomposition 
governed by rates of sublimation and vaporization 
in  a  first  order  manner  with  an  aggregate  rate 
constant  that  is  their  geometric  mean.  The  rate 
constants used in this model have been determined 
independently  of  the  model  e.g. sublimation  rates 
the  compilation  of  TATB 
properties by Dobratz5 gas phase rates were taken 
from  the  measurements  and  modeling  of  Melius 
and Lin Table 1.1 2 We use molar concentrations 
even  for  the  condensed  phase  components  in  the 
model.    Most  importantly  this  is  a  homogeneous 
application and so there is no gas phase diffusion 
or  mass  transport.    Gas  phase  pressures  P  are 
calculated  using  the  concentration  g  as  P 
gRT with T temperature and R the gas constant. 
Solid  decomposition  and  intermediate  product
The  first  step  in  the  model  is  the  solid 
description of solid TATB.  These states involve a 
solid  state  labeled  D-TATB  and  metastable  state 
labeled H-TATB.  H-TATB is not meant to indicate 
a  new  crystallographic  phase  of  TATB.    D and  H
TATB  are  coupled  via  a  set  of  first  order 
differential  equations 
isolation  generate  a  sinusoidal  oscillatory  system 
where  k1a and  k1b are  rate  constants  activated  by 
the  free energies of sublimation and  vaporization 
respectively  and  where t follows  the  temperature 
dependence  exhibited  by  the  time  to  ignition  in 
thermal explosion data for confined unpressurized 
time  as  a  function  of 
The time as a function of rate expressed in Eq. 
1 largely determines the overall response of both 
TATB  and  HMX  over  the  full  temperature  range 
of response.  This is shown in Fig. 1.  Figure 1A. 
from  a  number  of  different 
experiments  in  this  and  other  laboratories  on 
various  formulations  of  HMX  plotted  as  the 
temperature.    Thermal  explosion  data  plotted  as 
the  ignition  time  as  a function  of  the  inverse 
boundary temperature are shown as the open6 and 
filled7 circles.    Laser  induced  temperature  jump8
circles with an included x and laser ignition data9
circles  with  an  included  dot  are  plotted  as  the 
ignition  time  as  a  function  of  the  inverse  of  the 
directly  measured  surface  temperature.    Ignition 
induced by fast friction and shear Square with an 
the  directly  measured 
included dot10 are plotted as the ignition time as a 
function  of  the  inverse  of  the  directly  measured 
surface  temperature.    Ignition  induced  by  fast 
compression  and  flow  under  isothermal  heating 
conditions  squares with  an  included  x11 are 
plotted  as  the  ignition  time  as  a  function  of  the 
temperature.  Ignition induced by fast compression 
and  flow  under  linear  heating  conditions  squares
with an included cross11 are plotted as the inverse 
of the linear heating rate as a function of the peak 
temperature  at  ignition.    Laser  assisted  ignition 
temperatures12 are plotted as the ignition time as a 
function  of  the  isothermal  temperature open 
squares and  as  the  inverse  heating  rate  as  a 
function of the maximum observed temperature at 
ignition  filled  squares. 
detonation  experiments  are  also  plotted  as  the 
inverse heating rate as a function of the maximum 
observed  temperature  at  ignition  open  double 
triangle13 Figure 1B Ignition data from a number 
of  different  experiments 
laboratories  on  various  formulations  of  TATB 
plotted  as  the  ignition  time  as  a  function  of  the 
inverse  temperature.  Thermal  explosion  data are 
shown  as  the  open6 and  inverted  filled7 triangles.
Combustion  data  are  shown  as 
diamond.14 The  large  squares  green  online  are 
calculations to be described later.
Solid  transformation  and  decomposition  are 
where  R1 is  the  oscillatory  step  and  R2 is the 
generation  of  products. 
  Kinetic  parameters 
governing R2 are taken from rates of vaporization 
and  sublimation  of  TATB. 
stoichiometry of  R2 is  taken  from  the  T-jump 
experiments and modeling of Brills group.15
Temperature independent radical chemistry
The  complex  reaction  of  HC  with  NO2
provides a  significant  source  of  exothermicity  to 
the  overall  decomposition. We  use  a  simplified 
Fig. 1 Time to ignition data as a function of 
the  inverse  boundary  temperature  for  A 
HMX and B TATB based formulations. Data 
are  described  and  associated  with  markers  in 
mechanism  represented  here  as the  following 
overall reaction system.
This  system  has  been  studied  extensively  at 
room  temperature  and  the  two  observed  product 
channels represent 92 yield in this regime.  The 
temperature  dependence  of  the  rate  constants  has
not  been  determined  but  they  are  believed  to  be 
temperature  independent. While  we  are  in  the 
process of incorporating the rate of these reactions 
they are much faster than competing reactions and 
at  this  time  are  assumed  to  occur  promptly  as  a 
function  of  R2  and  to  yield  a  reaction  enthalpy 
equal  to  the  average  of  the  two  H3  -534
kJmole.   We also assume that most of the initial 
HC  concentration  is  consumed  by  this  oxidation 
and  from  the  stoichiometry  of  R2  we  include  a 
factor of three in Eq. 12. 
Bright zone burning mechanism
We also include a system of reactions again 
determined by Lin and Melius for HCN oxidation 
based upon the initial isomerization of HCN 2 16
whose  overall  enthalpy  is  quite  high.17 These
reactions are not important to calculations of time 
to ignition in the low temperature ignition regime 
of  TATB  but  are  important  to  calculations  of 
pressure  and  ignition  temperature  in  the  high
temperature regime of TATB.
Mathematical representation
The  set  of  coupled  differential  equations 
describing  the  evolution  of  the  key  chemical 
species D H-TATB and HCN are given by 
It  is  important  to  note  that  D and  Hmust  be 
coupled without loss to other species in the model 
and  are  therefore  unusual  as  kinetic  progress 
variables.  Also the system is cyclic and negative 
going  in  the  second  half  of  the  cycle.    The 
concentration  of  D-TATB  D  must  therefore  be 
held to zero after complete solid decomposition.
The  reaction  enthalpies  must  be  calculated 
with  respect  to  the  HNC  and  products  of  HNC 
oxidation and are given by Melius 2. The system is 
extremely  exothermic  overall
temperatures higher than the dark zone chemistry 
and is simply limited by the isomerization reaction 
R4a.    We  use  a  very  simplified  approximation  of 
the system assuming excess NO2 and write down 
HCN  2 NO2 o H  N2O  NO  CO2        
An  additional  equation 
calculate  the  total  number  of  unreacted  gas  phase 
determined by the stoichiometries in R1-R4 above.
The total pressure is then calculated by adding 
gas  phase  concentrations  treating  the  mixture  as 
ideal and using the equation P  gRT where P is 
the pressure in Pa and R in Jmole K.  
The rate constants are parameterized using
where  kiT  is  a  canonical  rate  constant  in  s-1 or 
m3mole s depending on reaction order  E and 
S are  the  energy  and  entropy  of  the  activated 
state.    Q is  an  equilibrium  constant  relating  the 
concentrations of the activated species to reagents
Both the thermal conductivity of solid TATB 
and  gas  phase  products  and  heat  capacity  of  the 
gas  phase  are  linearly  dependent  on  temperature 
where  i is  either  D or  g  and  with T in  K  heat 
capacity  C in  units  of  Jmole  K  and thermal 
conductivity Ois in Wm K. The heat capacity of 
solid TATB is given by 
The  heat  capacity  and  thermal  conductivity  of  a 
volume  element  in  the  calculation  is a  mole 
weighted  linear  combination  of  two states  DTATB and gas products g as  
except for the first solid phase considered and the 
initial solid density U is 7247 m3mole.
In all experiments described here in this paper 
6g  cylinders  of  PBX  9502     diameter  by  1 
long  are  encased  in  an  aluminum  sleeve  and 
heated  from outside  the  aluminum.  Diagnostics 
thermocouples  and  fiber  optics  are 
deployed  at  the  center  of  the  midplane  of  the 
sample.  Details  of  this  radial  thermal  explosion 
Fig. 2 Experimental configuration for these 
experiments showing the fully assembled 
cylinder on the left and the instrumented 
The values for the gases are an average of product 
species.    The  parameters  of  Eqs.  7  and  8  are 
The  equation  for  temperature  used  in  these
calculations  is  given  by the  non-steady  heat 
We  have  not  included  all  of  the  relevant  source 
terms indicated by this global model. Specifically 
we  do  not  include  the  very  endothermic  energy 
consumption  implied  by  the  formation  of  the 
products  in  R2  with the  the  assumption  that  a 
more  thermoneutral  stoichiometry  than  depicted 
here must apply. All initial concentrations are zero 
Fig. 3 Calculated central  temperature  green 
experiments with  PBX 9502. The cylindrical 
measured internal temperatures in grey.
geometry are presented in previous publications.18
Calculations  of  ignition  time  for  six different 
boundary  conditions  are  shown  in  Fig.  3.    The 
necessary  for  ignition.    The  green  boxes  of  Fig.1
are  adiabatic  Semonov  type  calculations  showing 
the  temperature  range  over  which  the model  is 
valid.  Given  our  new  mechanistic  and  broadly 
TABLE 2. Thermophysical constants.
applicable  understanding  of  the  thermodynamic 
role in these high temperatures this component of 
insensitivity is  readily  understood.  The  higher 
entropy  of  ignition  for  TATB  even  with  an 
enthalpy  of  ignition  similar  to  HMX  raises  the 
minimum  ignition  temperature  some  80  C.  In  the 
extrapolation of Fig. 1 it is also interesting to note 
that  if  one  assumes  a  detonation  temperature  of 
2000  C  0.5  1T  the  difference  in  ignition times 
for TATB and HMX is similar to that obtained for 
the relative reaction zone  widths  when detonation 
velocity is taken into account.
There  is  an  additional  pre-ignition  thermal 
feature  that  may  prove  critical  to  post-ignition 
propagation.    In  formulations  of  HMX  we  have 
used  x-ray  radiography  to  observe  extensive  loss 
of  density  in  regions  of  thermal  runaway  internal 
to the sample.19 These features are not observed in 
PBX 9502 even though thermal runaway exhibits 
the same behavior and the loss of solid to gas must 
be occurring.  At low sample density these features 
can  be  retrieved  as  is  shown  in  Fig.  4.    In  this 
figure  a  normalized  pre-ignition  radiograph  is 
shown  side  on  to  the  cylinder  and  illustrates  the 
exothermic chemistry at the center of the cylinder.
Ignition Temperature
Fig. 4 A  normalized  radiograph  of  a low 
density PBX  9502  sample  viewed  side  on 
showing the higher central transmission at the 
Fig. 5 Temperature  as  the  logarithm  of  the 
time  until  ignition.  PBX  9502  black  and 
PBX 9501 Grey data are shown.
important  contribution 
insensitivity exhibited by TATB is the difficulty in 
igniting  or  propagating  gas  phase  burning  of  any 
substantial rate.  It has been postulated20 that lower 
surface and gas phase temperatures are achieved at 
ignition  and  such  propagation  and  velocity  are 
constrained.  We show in Fig. 5 a number of fast 
pyrometry  data  all  obtained  spatially  at  the 
location  of  ignition  in  experiments  on  PBX  9502 
as  described  above.    The  hotter  black  data  were 
obtained  by  fast  thermocouple  signals  recorded 
directly to fast oscilloscopes. The cooler black data 
are obtained from the radiography.  While we are 
still working to understand this difference the most 
compelling  hypothesis 
radiography is dominated by a cooler solid surface 
temperature  while  the  fast  thermocouple  data  is 
obtained  in  the  hotter  gas  phase  at  a  rate  fast 
compared to the melting of the junction.  The data 
in  grey  are  obtained  from  experiments  on  PBX 
9501 and  show  more  complex  structure  but 
essentially  the  same  behavior. The  hottest  HMX 
record shows temperatures of approximately 2500 
K  in  the  regime  expected  for  gas  phase  burning 
above  an  HMX  surface. The  lower  temperature 
part of the record just prior to the jump to higher 
temperatures  is  also  in  the  regime  of measured 
surface  temperatures. The  hottest  region  observed 
for  PBX 9502  is  approximately  1200  K  half  that 
observed  for  HMX.  The  reasons  for  this  are  not 
understood  but  lower  temperature  is  expected  to 
Internal  pressure  inferred  from  low  density 
The  third  element  of  the  mechanism  of 
pressure generated  at  ignition  that determines
subsequent rates of internal combustion. We have 
shown  that  in  formulations  of  HMX  the  rate  of 
energy release is determined by the mechanism of 
deflagration  and  ultimately  the  pressure.25 We 
have completed a number of experiments designed 
subsequent  to  ignition  in  low  density  pressed 
samples  of  PBX  9502.  A  series  of  x-ray 
radiographic  images  shown  in  Fig.  6 and  taken 
from a several second movie illustrates a laminar 
conductive internal burning exhibited by 1.55 gcc
sample  pressed  from  prills  of  PBX  9502.    The 
sample  is  as  described  previously  and  is  viewed 
side on in this experiment.  The dynamic data are 
normalized to a pre-ignition static image and the xray transmission is increased in the lighter regions 
of  the  image.    A  conductive  burn  velocity  of  0.4 
mms  can be  measured  from  the position  of  the 
leading edge of the  transmission increase and a 1 
second interval between frames.
the  extremely  slow 
combustion observed after ignition there is no case 
deformation in these experiments.  Although more 
difficult  to  observe  when  normalized  the  linear 
cylindrical boundary of the sample during burning 
is  essentially a  two  dimensional  full  field  strain 
measurement.    In  HMX  the  consumption  of  the 
sample  would  proceed  via  convection  and 
microseconds  and  the  entire  event  completed  in 
100  microseconds.    For  TATB  we  observe  only 
conduction at these densities no case deformation 
indicating a rough maximum pressure of 10 MPA 
the  cylinder  would  deform 
Figure 6. Normalized x-ray radiographs viewing a cylinder of PBX 9502 side on. The areas of high 
transmission are the propagation of conductive burning through the sample. The frames are 1 s apart 
and the measured velocity 0.4 mms
and  an  event  lasting  15  seconds.  This  pressure  is 
consistent  with  those  inferred  from  strand  burner 
There  has  also  been  considerable  discussion 
formulations  or  experiments  performed  at  high 
case boundary strength which is by definition not 
a measure of pressure until rupture.  The ability to 
see  internal  temperature  rise  and  particularly  the 
ability  to  follow  to  high  temperatures  indicates 
true thermal ignition with late fast pressurization 
in these experiments.  The low pressures observed 
even during consumption by burning also seem to 
that  pressurization 
proceeds but is not rising significantly until a time 
essentially equivalent  to  the  thermal  explosion 
time.  This  observation  is  of  course  scale  and  free 
volume  dependent.    We  have  near  term  plans  to 
directly measure this internal pressurization. Other 
groups  have  also  made  measurements  of  internal 
pressure during heating.27
From  these  studies  three elements  to  the 
mechanisms  of  insensitivity  in  formulations  of 
TATB  arise.    The  first  thermal  stability  is  quite 
well explained in the context of our new paradigm 
of rate limitation by solid state thermodynamics in 
secondary  explosives.  The  temperature  jump  that 
indicates  gas  phase  ignition  is  lower  than  other 
explosives  although  the  reason  remains  unclear.  
Although  this  was  not  discussed  in  detail  a 
insensitivity could also be due to a lower material 
temperature  achieved  by 
mechanical energy.  If sufficient temperatures can 
be  reached  as  determined  by  the  initially  inert 
heating  on  impact  then  our  models  of  thermal 
response  valid  over  these  rates  of  heating  could 
use  these  temperatures  as  boundary  conditions  to 
determine  whether  or  not  there  is  a  possibility  of 
ignition.28 The  pressure  reached  upon  ignition  is 
also  observed  to  be  much  lower  although  again 
the reasons for this are unclear but likely related to 
temperature  and  responsible  for  the  extremely 
slow propagation of combustion.
We  have  observed  only  conductive 
velocities  of  less  than  a mmsecond  at  pressed 
PBX  9502  prill  densities  down  to  1.55  gcc.  The 
possibility of a deflagration to detonation at these 
densities  in  a  PBX  9502  and  other  TATB 
formulations  thus  seems  highly  unlikely  at  this 
  We  have  however  observed  sample 
deconsolidation  at  very  low  1.30gcc  sample 
densities and  have  not  yet  been  able  to  rule  out 
convective burning for these  samples. The rate of 
energy  release  is  still  consistent with energy 
release  by  slow  conductive  mechanisms  as 
evidenced by the absence of case deformation even 
in  these  extremely  low  density  porous  beds.    In 
understanding  of  these  faster  processes  at  the 
lowest densities studied.
experiments  we  will 
While  all  conditions  to  generate  DDT  are 
likely not known the necessity of fast convective 
burning  and  material  compression  ahead  of  the 
front  seem  critical. 
  The  majority  of  our 
observations at  low density  firmly  support a slow 
conductive consumption and therefore support the 
absence  of  DDT  in  samples  above  a  density  of 
1.30 gcc however  recent  results  do  not  allow  us 
to absolutely preclude the possibility of convection 
and thus the possibility of DDT in samples lower 
than 1.30 gcc at this time.
This  research  was  supported  by  Science 
Campaign  II  and  VI  and  the  NSRD  Program 
administered by Los Alamos National Laboratory 
Joint  Munitions  Program 
administered  by  both  the  Departments  of  Energy Simulation of cluster formation in overdriven and expanding TATB by molecular 
M. Riad Manaa Nir Goldman and Laurence E. Fried 
Energetic Materials Center 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
Abstract.  The  initiation  of  chemistry  by  a  shock  wave  occurs  through  complex 
interactions between chemical and mechanical mechanisms.  The first few nanoseconds 
after shock arrival is a crucial time period where the initiation of exothermic chemical 
reactions leads to the growth of local hot spots.  We are simulating these mechanisms in 
two  ways.    First  we  are  performing  atomistic  simulations  of  shocked  TATB  using  a 
modified  version of  the  ReaxFF1 force  field. We  have  simulated  overdriven  detonation 
waves in TATB using the multi-scale shock technique2.  In our simulations of overdriven 
shocked TATB we find that large-scale clusters encompassing thousands of atoms form 
after  1  ns.      We  also  simulated  the  chemistry  of  expanding  detonation  products.    We 
found  that  clusters  formed  under  shock  loading  dissociated  to  form  small  product 
The chemistry of detonating high explosives is 
not well understood especially for insensitive high 
  Insensitive  high  explosives  have 
reactions zones lengths of 1 mm or greater leading 
to typical reaction times of 125 ns or longer.  The 
condensed phase environment of a detonating high 
explosive  leads  to  substantial  line  broadening 
spectroscopic  determination  of 
chemical species in detonating materials difficult.  
The chemical and physical basis of the high degree 
of  insensitivity  found  in  the  explosive  135triamino-246-trinitrobenzene TATB are not yet 
understood.    Prior  atomistic  simulations  by  some 
of  us3  found  that  TATB  under  conditions  of 
overdriven  shock  states  produced  highly  stable 
heterocyclic materials that slowed the progress to 
full chemical equilibrium. 
report  on  atomistic 
simulations  of  shocked  TATB  under  overdriven 
detonation  products.    Our  goal  in  this  study  is  to 
better  determine  detonation  products  made  in 
TATB  in  order  to  implement  more  accurate 
chemically-based  reactive  flow  models  based  on 
the Cheetah thermochemical code.  Our approach 
to  detonation  modeling  is  to  use  atomistic  and 
grain  scale  simulations  to  inform  models  of  the 
continuum  response  of  TATB.    We  note  that 
Cheetah currently has larger errors for TATB than 
for most explosives.  This is partly due to the nonideal nature of TATB but it could also be due to 
unique or exotic chemical species produced during 
the  detonation  of  TATB  that  are  not  found  with 
other explosive materials and that are not included 
in the Cheetah model.    This paper investigates the 
possible existence of these species. 
explosives has been attributed to the formation of 
graphitic carbon clusters during detonation4.  The 
kinetics  of  carbon  cluster  formation  have  been 
measured and reported by Ten et al. 5. 
conducted  for  shocked  and  expanding  systems.  
For  shocked  systems  the  Multi-Scale  Shock 
Technique2  MSST  was  employed.    The  MSST 
intersection  between  the  Rayleigh  line  and  the 
instantaneous  shock  Hugoniot.    As  such  the 
MSST is an implementation of the ZND theory of 
detonation for a molecular dynamics simulation. 
the  system  approximately  on 
In  this  study  large  scale  simulations  of 
shocked  TATB  were  undertaken  with  forces 
determined  through  the  ReaxFF  empirical  force 
field1.  The ReaxFF force field includes more than 
13 terms describing various chemical interactions.  
terms  describe  covalent  bonding  with 
overcoordination and undercoordination penalties 
interactions  conjugation  bending 
torsions  as  well  as  non-bonded 
interactions  such  as  van  der  Waals  and  Coulomb 
ReaxFF  parameters  were  based  on  the  study 
of Chenowith et al.6 with nitrogen parameters and 
other  modifications  made  by  van  Duin. 
preliminary  simulations  of  TATB  with  these 
parameters we found charge instabilities to occur 
at  pressures  over  40  GPa.    In  order  to  eliminate 
interaction  with  singles  and  doubles  calculations 
of diatomics and a few representative triatomics. 
In  Figure  1  we  show  the  potential  energy 
surface  for  the  OH  radical  calculated  with  the 
ReaxFF  potentials  and  also  with  the  QCISD 
method.    We  note  that  the  modified  Chenowith 
parameters had a particularly soft O-H interaction 
when compared with the quantum results.   
Figure  1    O-H  diatomic  potential  energy 
curve  for  ReaxFF  modified  for  TATB  ReaxNewP  the  modified  ReaxFF  with  additional 
repulsive  terms  Reax-Wall  compared  to  the 
ReaxFF  parameters  used  for  RDX7  Reax-noWall  and  quantum  QCISD  calculations  Ab 
It  was  found  that  augmenting  the  ReaxFF 
potential  with  an  exponential  repulsion  term  for 
each element pair brought the ReaxFF force field 
configuration.    In  most  instances  the  ReaxFF 
force  field  was  not  sufficiently  repulsive  at  short 
distances.    It  was  found  that  charge  instabilities 
electropositive  elements  having  an  unphysically 
close  distance.    Improving  the  repulsive  behavior 
of the potential was found to improve the stability 
of the ReaxFF potential at pressures over 40 GPa. 
A  small  modification  of  the  charge  equilibration 
hardness  parameter  of  H  and  O  was  also 
necessary to prevent situations where H acquired a 
charge of more than 1.  After these changes the 
ReaxFF  potential  was  stable  for  pressures  along 
the shock Hugoniot of up to 100 GPa. 
Simulations  were  performed  with  ReaxFF 
with  20160  atoms  840  molecules  with  a  time 
step of between 0.1 and 0.2 fs.  It was found that a 
simulations  above  50  GPa  in  pressure.    Initial 
conditions  for  the  MSST  were  generated  by 
equilibrating an orthogonal unit cell for TATB for 
10 ps.  MSST simulations were carried out for up 
Expansion  simulations  were  carried  out 
the  quantum  Density  Functional  Tight 
Binding DFTB method to calculate forces.8  The 
system was kept on an approximate adiabat using 
the  DOLLS9  method  during 
simulations.  A system size of 4 TATB molecules 
96 atoms was used in the expansion calculations.  
Initial  conditions  were  taken  from  the  TATB 
simulations of Manaa et al.3  The simulations were 
conducted for 250 ps with a time step of 0.2 fs. 
ReaxFF simulations of shocked TATB were 
conducted  at  shock  velocities  of  8.5  and  9  kms.  
This  is  above  the  Chapman-Jouguet  velocity  of 
TATB  roughly  7.6  kms.    Studying  overdriven 
states allows us to accelerate the chemistry so that 
molecular  dynamics  simulations  of  chemical 
reactions is feasible.   
In  Figure  2  we  show  the  thermodynamic 
parameters  determined  from  a  simulation  at  9 
Figure  2    Thermodynamic  states  for  a  molecular 
dynamics MSST simulation at 9 kms are shown as 
a  function  of  time.    Thermodynamic  states  show 
relatively little change after roughly 30 ps. 
The  thermodynamic  states  predicted  by  the 
shock simulation at 9 kms are in good agreement 
with  experiment  data  and  also  previous  Density 
Functional Tight Binding DFTB8 simulations by 
Manaa et al.  This is shown in Figure 3 where the 
experiments by Green et al10. 
simulation  methods  are  compared 
One  of  the  most  interesting  features  of  our 
simulations  of  overdriven  TATB  is  the formation 
of large covalently bonded clusters.  These clusters 
contain roughly equal quantities of C N O and H.   
Figure 3  The experimental reacted Hugoniot of 
LX-17 92.5 TATB is compared to a ReaxFF 
simulation at 9 kms and also to DFTB quantum 
simulation results. 
An image showing one of the clusters from the 9 
kms simulation is shown in Figure 4. 
Figure  4    A  large  covalently  bonded  condensed 
phase  cluster  containing  C  gray  N  blue  O 
red and H not shown. 
We  have  analyzed  the  elemental  composition  of 
the clusters.  We show the elemental composition 
as a function of time in Figure 5. 
Figure 5  The elemental composition of clusters at 
9  kms  shock  speed  are  shown.    C  is  the  most 
abundant  element  while  H  is  the  least  abundant 
We find similar results with a shock velocity 
of 8.5 kms. As shown in Figure 6 the cluster has 
roughly  30  more  atoms  than  for  the  9  kms 
system.    The  chemical  makeup  of  the  clusters  is 
similar for both systems.  We note that an apparent 
chemical equilibrium is rapidly established in both 
cases.  The rapidity of this process is not consistent 
with many ideas of the slow reactivity of TATB.  
In particular we note that the clusters do not show 
any tendency to grow on this timescale.  We note 
that  experiments5  show  cluster  growth  on  a  1  s 
timescale.    It  is  possible  that  the  ReaxFF  force 
field is too reactive at these conditions or it could 
also be that the reaction zone of overdriven TATB 
is extremely short. 
Figure  6    Chemical  composition  of  clusters  as  a 
function of time for an 8.5 kms shock.   
We  also  analyzed  the  probability  distribution 
of cluster size.  Some clusters such as fullerenes 
show  strong  size  dependence  in  their  probability 
distribution.  The probability distribution is shown 
in Figure 7.   Molecular weight 1 and 2 represent 
atomic hydrogen and diatomic hydrogen.  Values 
between 10 and 50 are small molecules.  We find a 
statistical  distribution  with 
dependence  probability  depends  on  molecular 
weight via a single exponent between  molecular 
weights of 100-10000.  Above a molecular weight 
of 10000 the distribution changes due to the finite 
number  of  atoms  in  the  simulation  cell.    We 
conclude that clusters are likely formed through a 
random  process  and 
distribution is nearly continuous. 
 1000  10000  100000
Figure  7    Calculated  probability  distribution  for 
all molecular species including clusters found in 
the 9 kms simulation.   
The  cluster  size  can  be  found  through  a 
calculation  of  the  radius  of  gyration.    This  is 
shown in Figure 8.  The cluster radius at 8.5 kms 
is  in  rough  agreement  with  the  radius  of  0.9  nm 
reported  by  Ten  et  al.5  at  a  time  of  0.5  s.    Ten 
observes a growth in cluster size between 0.5 and 
1  s.    These  times  are  well  outside  our  current 
ability to simulate with atomistic techniques. 
Figure 8  Mean cluster size as a function of time 
is  shown.    There  is  little  apparent  trend  toward 
cluster growth with time. 
We also studied the concentration of small gas 
molecules as a function of time.  Figure 9 shows 
concentration is found in the 8.5 kms simulation.  
Similar  results  were  found  for 
simulation.    It  is  somewhat  surprising  that  the 
concentration  of  the  HNCO  molecule  surpassed 
that of the more stable N2 molecule.   It could be 
that this is indicative of a limitation in the ReaxFF 
Figure 9  The concentration of small gas species 
as  a  function  of  time  is  shown  for  the  8.5  kms 
We  now  consider  simulations  of  expanding 
TATB detonation products.  In these simulations 
initial  conditions  were  taken  directly  from  the 
work of Manaa et al.3  The unit cell was expanded 
from its initial configuration while maintaining the 
system  on  an  approximate  adiabat.    Figure  10 
shows a snapshot of a particular simulation before 
and after adiabatic expansion. 
Figure 10  Initial and final states for a simulation 
of adiabatically expanding TATB.  The initial state 
is  dominated  by  clusters  while  the  final  state  is 
dominated by small molecules. 
The  chemical  composition  of  the  expanded 
detonation products are shown in Figure 11.  The 
dissociation of the clusters is a chemical process 
since  the  clusters  are  held  together  by  chemical 
bonds.    Since  energy  is  released  as  the  system 
expands the process is most probably exothermic. 
Molecules  commonly  believed  to  be  detonation 
products  N2  CO  are  found. 
somewhat  unusual  species  such  as  CH2N2  are 
expansion.        Where  possible  we  have  validated 
our  results  against  experimental  data.    We  note 
that the equation of state of TATB and the cluster 
sizes  we  predict  are  in  good  agreement  with 
There  are  considerable  limitations  in  our 
technique however.  We note that empirical force 
fields such as ReaxFF may not adequately capture 
all  aspects  of  chemistry  at  extreme  conditions.  
Quantum simulations are likely more reliable but 
have significant timescale limitations.  The DFTB 
is  partly  empirical  and  some 
its  performance  at  extreme 
densities and temperatures is desirable. 
This work was performed under the auspices of the 
U.S.  Department  of  Energy  by  Lawrence 
Livermore  National  Laboratory  under  Contract The temperature eld around collapsing cavities in condensed phase explosives
Louisa Michael and Nikolaos Nikiforakis
Laboratory for Scientic Computing
Cavendish Laboratory University of Cambridge CB3 0HE UK
Abstract. This work is concerned with the effect of cavity collapse in non-ideal explosives as a means of controlling their sensitivity. To this end we perform resolved numerical
simulations of a single cavity collapsing in liquid nitromethane using a multi-phase formulation which can account for the large density difference across the material interface
without generating spurious temperature peaks. The model is validated against experimental and analytic data. The analysis of the results is focused on the effect of the collapse on
the temperature eld and the subsequent formation of hot spots. We observe that hot spots
are formed at the regions directly in front and behind the collapsed cavity as well as in the
Mach stem region formed by superposition of shock waves.
This work is motivated by the necessity for optimizing the performance of nonideal inhomogeneous explosives such as those used in mining. In
order to increase their sensitivity and to control their
performance cavities are introduced in the bulk
of the explosive often by means of glass microballoons. When a precursor shock wave passes
through the explosive these cavities collapse generating regions of locally high pressure and high
temperature which are commonly referred to as hot
spots. These lead to multiple local ignition sites
which cumulatively result in a shorter time to ignition than that of the neat material. Parameters
such as the number size shape and distribution of
the cavities affect the degree of sensitisation of the
explosive. Understanding the correlation between
these parameters and the reduced ignition time will
allow better control of the behaviour of the explosive.
To this end the collapse of cavities has been extensively studied in the past by means of experiment and numerical simulation.
mention some of those studies for cavities collapsing in liquid gelatinous and solid explosives. Field
and co-workers studied single and multiple cavity collapse in inert and reacting liquids and gels
experimentally1 2. More recently Swantek and
Austing3 have experimentally studied the collapse
of cavity arrays under stress loading and analysed
the velocity eld around the cavities using the PIV
Numerical simulations of cavities collapsing in
non-reacting liquids have also been considered extensively such as in work by Ball et al.4 Michael
et al.5 and Lauer et al.6 who considered cavity collapse in water. Numerical studies of cavities collapsing in solids include work by Menikoff7 who
studied pores collapsing in HMX and by Ozlem8
on cavities collapsing in an exemplary solid. Single and multiple pores collapsing in viscoplastic
in this work the materials are described by means
of EoSs in Mie-Grneisen form and a temperaturedependent reaction-rate law is employed to describe
combustion processes. The exponential temperature
dependence of the rate law renders the system sensitive to spurious numerical perturbations in temperature. Considerable care has been taken regarding
the form of the equations and the numerical algorithm in order to eliminate such artifacts.
The rest of the paper is outlined as follows the
next section presents the underlying mathematical
formulation in terms of the governing partial differential equations the EoSs which close the system and the form and calibration of the reaction
rate law for nitromethane combustion. A section
on validation follows where we compare numerical results against theoretical and experimental temperatures in shocked nitromethane and the CJ and
von Neumann values for steady state detonation.
The ignition regime is validated in a similar way
by comparing numerical and experimental timesto-ignition for various input pressures with the use
of an ignition Pop-plot. In the results section we
consider the collapse of a gas cavity in liquid nitromethane and follow the events leading to the generation of local temperatures which are more than
three times the post-shock temperature of the neat
material. The results indicate that two main hot spot
regions are generated one at the rear of the cavity
after collapse and another at Mach stems as a result
of wave superposition.
Mathematical formulation
A formulation which recties the issues mentioned previously was proposed by Michael13 who
augmented the model presented by Allaire14 with
an equation evolving the reaction progress variable.
By considering the gas inside the cavity to
be material-1 and the liquid nitromethane to be
material-2 the governing equations for this system
HMX can be found in the inert and reactive simulations by Tran and Udaykumar9 10 and Kapahi and
Although numerous numerical studies on cavities collapsing in explosive media have been performed little has been said about the temperature
eld of the material which is the obvious variable
to consider in ignition studies. Exceptions to this
are the work by Bourne and Milne12 who presented
examples of the temperature eld in nitromethane
Tran and Udaykumar9 10 who studied the temeprature eld in HMX and Ozlem8 who focused on the
temperature inside the cavity.
The accurate recovery of temperature elds in
numerical simulations of resolved cavity collapse
poses a number of challenges. An essential prerequisite is the characterisation of the explosive material by means of a realistic equation of state EoS
for example in Mie-Grneisen rather than in polytropic form which increases the complexity of the
underlying governing equations and hence the difculty of their numerical integration. Moreover
the large density difference across the material interface at least 10001 for a gas bubble in a liquid generates additional problems compared to a
uniform material simulation. Assuming that a nonoscillatory interface capturing numerical scheme is
employed thin but purely numerical mixture zones
are generated at the material boundaries which give
rise to density and temperature oscillations. Even
if the density oscillations are eliminated the temperature oscillations may persist. This could be attributed to the fact that the specic heat of the articial mixture cannot be physically derived and hence
must be constructed mathematically.
of their origin the temperature oscillations would
be destructive in any ignition studies as they would
spuriously activate the temperature-dependent reaction rate thus generating false ignition.
In this article we present resolved numerical simulations of the collapse of an isolated cavity in liquid nitromethane using a multi-phase formulation to
mathematically describe the problem Michael13.
This formulation is robust in the presence of large
density discontinuities such as the one encountered
across the gas-liquid interface of the cavity boundary it allows for realistic equations of state and
can reliably recover temperature elds. Specically
Equation of state parameters for ni
and Grneisen coefcient   0. The gas inside the cavity is modelled by the ideal gas equation
of state which is of Mie-Grneisen form as well
with pref  0 and eref  0 . The parameters for the
equations of state of the two materials are given in
Recovery of temperature
The multi-phase nature of the model allows for
separate temperature elds to be computed for each
As a result the nitromethane temperature T2 is
computed explicitly from the equation of state and
can be used directly in the reaction rate law.
The ideal gas equation off state results in the
overheating of the gas inside the cavity since high
pressures are reached within the cavity during the
collapse process. However at these timescales head
transfer would not physiclly take place and so the
cavity temperature would not affect the ambient nitromethane temperature. As a result temperatures
inside the cavity are not of interest for this work and
hence are not presented.
The nature of the model allows large 10001
density gradients to be sustained across material
boundaries with no spurious oscillations generated
at the material interface.
Reaction rates for nitromethane
In order to model the reactions in nitromethane a
temperature-dependent single-step Arrhenius reac

where for i  12 i are the densities for the air
and reactant zi are their corresponding volume fractions z1  z2  1  is the total density given by
  z11  z22 u is the velocity vector and p is
the total pressure. The total specic energy is given
2 u2  e where e is the total internal energy. Also  is a reaction progress variable and
K represents the reaction source terms to be dened later. The mixture rule for the total internal
energy is given by e  1z1e1  2z2e2 where ei
for i  12 are the internal energies for the air and
reactant given by their corresponding equations of
state. A mixture rule for   1
1 where  is the total adiabatic index is also required and in this case
is given by   z11  z22. The sound speed for
the total mixture is given by
where yi is the mass fraction of material-i given by
This formulation can be considered an augmented two-phase model in the same way that
the Euler equations have been augmented to study
gaseous combustion problems Nikiforakis and
To close the system the Cochran-Chan equation of state16 is employed to describe liquid nitromethane. This is an EoS of Mie-Grneisen form
with reference pressure given by
reference energy given by
tion rate law is used of the form
where C is the pre-exponential factor and TA is the
activation temperature of the material.
In the literature many sets of the reaction rate
parameters are available for liquid nitromethane.
For example Menikoff and Shaw17 use the set
CTA  2.6 109 s1 11500K Tarver and
Urtiew18 use the set CTA  6.9 1010 s1
14400K and Ripley et al.19 use the set CTA 
1.27 1012 s1 20110K. In this work we adopt
the pre-exponential factor proposed by Menikoff
and Shaw17 and adjust the activation temperature
to TA 11350K in order to match the experimentally calculated overtake time and the shape of the
velocity versus distance graph of the shock-induced
ignition experiment neat nitromethane shocked at
9.1GPa in Shefeld et al.20
In order to calculate the value for the heat of detonation Q we follow the approach of Arienti21.
This involves varying the parameter Q to match
as closely as possible the experimental value of
the CJ point of 12.5GPa22 on
In general varying the value of
Q shifts the reactive Hugoniots upwards. When
the Rayleigh line becomes tangent to the reactive
pseudo-product Hugoniot the appropriate value
for Q is determined. Here Q  4.48 106 Jkg1.
We note that the set of calibrated parameters
given above is valid for steady-state detonation
propagation of neat nitromethane and no further adjustment is necessary for ignition case studies as
the results in the validation section indicate.
The resulting system of equations is integrated
numerically using a high resolution shock-capturing
numerical scheme namely the MUSCL-Hancock
nite volume method with an underlying HLLC
Riemann solver. Hierarchical structured adaptive
mesh renement AMR is used to dynamically increase the resolution locally23. The source terms
that describe chemical reactions are integrated with
a high-order Runge-Kutta scheme.
The aim of this section is to validate the resulting code and also to assess whether the combina
tion of parameters obtained in the previous section
can match the experimentally determined von Neumann spike the CJ values and the ignition pop-plot
without any further user adjustment.
Shocked nitromethane temperature
In the rst instance we compare the temperature of the shocked neat non-reacting nitromethane
computed from our simulations with experimentally
measured values as well as with the temperature
calculated from analytic theory and molecular simulation for various post-shock pressures this compilation is presented in Fig. 1. The set of experimen
Fig. 1. Post-shock temperatures at different pressures. Comparison between results from this work
solid circles and a compilation of published experimental analytic and molecular simulation data.
tal data most commonly used as a set of reference
values is given by Lysne and Hardesty24 and have
been deduced numerically from experimentally determined parameters. Other experiments measuring post-shock temperatures include the work by
Winey et al.25 and Hervout et al.26 as well as work
by Delpuech and Menil27 and Dufort28. Analytic
work includes Winey et al.25 and Cowperthwaite
and Shaw29 while results from microscopic simulations are given by Soulard30 Jones31 Liu et al.32
Hervout et al.33 and Desbiens et al.34.
The solid circles   in Fig. 1 present the temperature of neat nitromethane predicted from our simulations. The temperature of nitromethane material2 is calculated by expression 7. It is important
to note the wide spread of the results from different
sources and the fact that there is no indication of experimental error. Nevertheless the post-shock tem
63
peratures predicted from our simulations are well
within the extremes of this compilation and they are
closest to the ones by Lysne and Hardesty24.
Steady ZND detonation
Having established a reasonable post-shock temperature we now assess whether the code will predict the correct CJ and von Neumann peak values.
To this end a one-dimensional slab of liquid nitromethane is shocked to 23GPa a value which is
close to the von Neumann pressure.
Following an initial unsteady evolution the simulation settles to a steady detonation wave yielding
a constant value of the von Neumann spike pressure
of 22.7GPa and a pressure at the CJ point equal to
12.6GPa. These values fall within the range of values reported in the literature35.
Comparison with experimental ignition times
For the nal part of this assessment it is worth
recalling that we are mainly interested in the early
ignition stages of this shock-to-detonation process.
It is not unusual to nd that depending on the mathematical formulation of the model the reaction rate
parameters are not suitable for ignition studies. This
is attributed to the fact that the parameters are adjusted to t post-shock temperatures and steady detonation values. To assess whether the current set-up
can be employed for arbitrary studies without any
further adjustment we compare our numerical results against experimental Pop-plot data that show
induction time i.e. time to ignition versus input
pressure. The exact time when ignition occurs is
problematic since ideally one would use the same
denition of time of ignition for both numerical and
experimental results. In numerical simulations the
time of ignition can be dened as the time when
a specic fraction of the explosive material has reacted. The selection of the appropriate percentage
should be based on experiments. However experimentally it is rather difcult where possible at all
to measure the chemical species and ignition is
usually measured using luminosity something that
is not trivial to accurately and consistently retrieve
from the simulations. In any case we arbitrarily dene ignition to be the time when a small percentage
namely 10 of the explosive material has reacted
Fig. 2. Ignition time vs input pressure Pop-plot. The
black lled circles represent experimental data and
the open squares numerically calculated data.
and compare our numerical results against experimental data taken from Berke et al.36 Hardesty37
and Chaiken38. This comparison is presented in
Fig. 2 and shows that the numerical results fall well
within the range of the experimental ignition data.
We note that when we varied the denition of ignition by an increasing percentage 1050 of the
reacted explosive there was a shift of the numerical
values towards higher times but even at 50 the
line was still within experimental scatter.
The collapse of a single cavity in reactive liquid
In this section we consider an isolated gas-lled
cavity of radius 0.08mm collapsing in reacting liquid nitromethane. The computational domain spans
0mm0.2mm 0.75mm0.54mm and the initial
conditions in the shocked and pre-shocked regions
are given in Table 2. The evolution of the reaction
progress variable  left pressure p middle and
nitromethane temperature TNM right is illustrated
at selected times in Fig. 3.
Early times of the collapse
The incident shock wave ISW initially travels
within nitromethane compressing the material to
10.98GPa and raising the temperature to 1263K as
illustrated in Fig. 3a. Since we are particularly interested in the temperature of nitromethane and to
ease the interpretation of results the cavity region
is masked out in the temperature plots we present.
When the ISW interacts with the cavity
Pre-shock region Cavity region
Table 2. Initial conditions for the collapse of a cavity in reactive nitromethane.
impedance mismatch between the air and the nitromethane generates a shock wave that travels inside the cavity and a rarefaction wave that travels
upstream in nitromethane. The oblique interaction
of the ISW with the cavity boundary leads to the irregular distribution of pressure and velocity within
the rarefaction fan and to the generation of a liquid
jet. At these initial states of the collapse process
see Fig. 3ab and away from the cavity where
the rarefaction wave RW from the collapse has not
yet arrived the reaction progress variable evolves
as it would in a 1D neat nitromethane experiment.
The expansion generated by the RW leads to a lowering of the temperature within the jet and this affects the shape of the reaction zone. As a result
before the cavity collapses the highest temperature
in the nitromethane is in the uniform unperturbed
region behind the ISW.
Just before the collapse the air-shock reaches
the downstream cavity wall where it undergoes a
transmission-reection process. However the transmitted shock wave is weak and hence does not signicantly raise the temperature of the nitromethane
When the liquid jet reaches the downstream cavity wall the cavity collapses at t 0.040s and
two new curved shock waves are generated. One
is the front collapse shock wave FCSW moving
downstream in the un-shocked nitromethane and
the other is the back collapse shock wave BCSW
moving upstream in the nitromethane that has already been shocked by the ISW. We call the region
shocked by the FCSW front hot spot FHS and
equivalently the region shocked by the BCSW back
hot spot BHS. After the collapse the cavity takes
the form of two kidney-shaped lobes as observed in
this point we observe for the rst
temperatures that are
in the collapse process
above the post-shock temperature.
the BCSW generates temperatures in the range
1263K 3300K see Fig. 3c accompanied by a
small amount of reaction of   0.97. The FCSW
generates temperatures within the range 1263K 
1670K see Fig. 3c in a region of almost no reaction at all   0.99. The higher temperatures
and the faster reaction at the rear of the cavity occur by the re-compresssion of the material that had
already been shocked and was therefore pre-heated.
Ignition in at least one reaction site is observed
at time tign 0.0451s in the BHS.
Late stages of the collapse
The wave patterns generated at the late stages of
the collapse process are fairly complex so in this
work we only focus on the components that contribute to a signicant rise of temperature and subsequent reaction around the cavity.
Growth of the high temperature regions and the
reaction zones at the front and rear of the cavity is
seen as the FCSW and BCSW travel outwards. Although these regions grow in area the maximum
temperature recorded within them decreases with
time. The maximum temperature in the front hightemperature region reaches 2068K and 3089K at
the rear high-temperature region.
For this set up the ISW proved slower than the
nitromethane jet. Hence at the time of collapse
the ISW is still traversing around the lobes. As a
result of passing over the upper part of the upper
lobe and equivalently the lower part of the bottom
lobe many transmission-reection processes take
place. These processes result in a coalescence of
waves LSW that are transmitted from the lobes
into the pre-shocked by the ISW nitromethane residing around the lobes Fig. 3d. This leads to
Fig. 3. Early stages of the ignition process in the vicinity of a void embedded in liquid nitromethane following the passage of a 10.98GPa shock wave. Evolution of mass fraction  left pressure p middle and
nitromethane temperature TNMright at times t a 0.0229s b 0.0351s c 0.0591s and d 0.0629s.
The horizontal and vertical axes are space ordinates in m. The inset is a zoom of the MSHS region where
reaction starts. Note that the colour scale changes between the displayed times.
grows faster than in the BHS as ignition is observed
at 0.004s after the MSHS is formed while ignition
in the BHS is observed at 0.005s after this hot spot
To the rear of the cavity the waves emanating
from the top and bottom lobe are superposed. Parts
of them are superposed with the BCSW as well see
Fig. 3d. This results in regions that have been
shocked twice or even three-times and hence leads
to temperatures of the order of 1600K.
In the nal stages of the collapse process the remains of the cavity are advected downstream and
more burning is observed in the reaction sites with
 reaching a value of 0.0745 in the BHS and a value
of 0.265 in the MSHS by the end of the simulation.
the generation of temperatures higher than the postshock temperature in the regions around the lobes.
However this temperature rise is not sufcient to
generate a new ignition site.
As the ISW travels downstream it attains curvature due to its interaction with the shape of the
cavity and is thereafter superposed with the FCSW
in front of the cavity Fig. 3cd. The superposition of the two waves generates a Mach stem region MSHS which encloses high temperatures of
the range 1263K 1493K. At this point the highest overall temperature is still observed in the BHS
2773K. As the Mach stem region grows the temperature it encloses increases rapidly reaching values of the order of 2700K.
Ignition is observed in the Mach stem hot spot
MSHS at t 0.0630s. The reaction in this locus
Fig. 4. Lineouts along y  0.21mm from gure 3. The mass fraction top row the pressure middle row and
the nitromethane temperature bottom row are shown at stages a 118 b 1937 c 3844 corresponding
to times a 0.00228s0.0424s b 0.0445s0.0780s and c 0.0798s0.0915s.
Evolution along constant latitude lines
It is informative to consider the evolution of the
oweld and its effect on temperature along lines
of constant latitude. Given the space limitations
of this report we discuss only events along the
y  0.21mm shown in Fig. 3. This provides insight
to the hot spot generation at the rear of the cavity
BHS the minimal reaction at the front of the cavity FHS and the temperature distribution close to
the centreline of the void. The evolution of the reaction rate variable   pressure and nitromethane temperature along this line is shown in Fig. 4.
At the early stages a slight increase in the temperature eld by the passage of the ISW is seen.
Upon the interaction of the ISW with the cavity
a downstream-travelling air shock is generated and
an upstream-travelling nitromethane RW. The effect
of the RW is a decrease in pressure and temperature. As it propagates its effect becomes more
profound manifested as a further local decrease in
the pressure and temperature elds and rate of reaction. The evolving crest-like feature following the
local decrease seen in the pressure and temperature
plots Fig. 4a is due to the formation of the ni
67
As the cavity collapses the lineout crosses both
shock waves FCSW and BCSW seen as two highpressure and high-temperature fronts moving away
from each other labelled as 10  11 in Fig. 4a.
The BCSW compresses the material to a considerably higher pressure than the FCSW generating a
higher temperature at the rear of the cavity compared to the front. Initially the high-pressure fronts
i.e. BCSW and FCSW coincide with the hightemperature fronts. However as the collapse shock
waves CSWs move away from the cavity the pressure fronts propagate faster than the temperature
fronts. The formation of the two CSWs leads to a
considerable increase in the reaction rate especially
within the BHS as indicated by the  -plot in Fig.
4b. The reaction in the FHS is observed to be
comparatively slow. Within the BHS and along this
lineout ignition is seen to occur at t 0.0498s.
Waves emanate from the lobes after the collapse
of the cavity which are seen to intersect the line
labelled 14 . By stage 26 they are superposed
with the BCSW labelled 15  along this lineout.
Neither the downward waves nor their superposition
with the BCSW result in a considerable increase in
the temperature eld. In fact the highest temperature still occurs in the BHS. At stage 27 the upward wave from the lower lobe not modelled explicitly but with its behaviour implicitly taken into
account by the reective lower boundary reaches
the line y  0.21mm. Part of this wave is superposed with both the BCSW and the wave entities
emanating from the upper lobe labelled 16  and
part of it with the waves emanating from the upper
lobe only labelled 17 . These superpositions increase the pressure locally but do not have a significant effect on the temperature. As the shock waves
labelled 18  move away from the cavity the temperature and pressure along the line y  0.21mm do
not increase further but the reaction in the BHS still
Focusing on the reaction progress variable eld
illustrated in the plot of Fig. 4c it is observed
that at all late stages the largest amount of reaction
occurs in the BHS. Some reaction is also seen in the
FHS and in the region that is traversed by the BCSW
and the waves emanating from the lobes. After the
ignition at stages 2122 the fuel continues burning
until it reaches the threshold of   0.01 where no
more fuel is considered to be available for burning.
After stage 35 the advection of the rear remaining parts of the cavity reach the lineout leading to
the low pressure and temperature parts of the lineouts and the   1 plateau seen in Fig. 4c.
In this work we perform resolved numerical simulations of cavity collapse in liquid nitromethane
using a multi-phase formulation which can recover
reliable temperatures in the vicinity of the cavity.
The model is validated against experimental and analytic data. Specically we demonstrate that reasonable shocked nitromethane temperatures can be
recovered at different shock pressures that the deduced CJ and von Neumann values match the values
found in the literature and also that the experimentally determined ignition pop-plot data are matched.
Following the validation we study the shockinduced cavity collapse in reacting liquid nitromethane and focus on the effect of the collapse
on the temperature eld and the subsequent formation of hot spots. We observe that hot spots are
formed at the high-temperature regions directly in
front and behind the collapsed cavity as well as in
the Mach stem region formed by the superposition
of the front collapse shock wave and the incident
shock wave. The highest temperatures are observed
in the hot spots and in regions of wave superposition. However localised high temperature does not
always lead to an ignition site.Microstructure effects on the initiation threshold behavior of HMX and PBXN-5 
Eric J. Welle1 Christopher D. Molek1 Ryan R. Wixom2 Philip Samuels3 and Jarred T. Langhals1 
1Air Force Research Laboratory 
Munitions Directorate Eglin AFB FL 32542 
2Sandia National Laboratories 
Explosives Technologies Group Albuquerque NM 87185 
3Army Research Development and Engineering Center 
Picatinny Arsenal NJ 07806 
Abstract.  Understanding  the  role  microstructure  plays  in  detonation  behavior  has  been 
the  subject  of  a  significant  body  of  research  within  the  detonation  physics  community.  
The  pursuit  of  this  understanding  is  important  because  safety  and  performance 
characteristics have been shown to strongly correlate to particle morphology.  Historical 
studies  have  often  correlated  bulk  powder  characteristics  to  the  performance  or  safety 
characteristics of pressed materials.  That approach was taken because until more recently 
there were no techniques that could precisely characterize the pressed microstructure and 
it  was  assumed  that  there  was  correlation  between  the  bulk  powder  and  the  pressed 
microstructure.  We believe that a clearer and more relevant correlation is made between 
the pressed microstructure and the observed detonation behavior.  This type of assessment 
is possible as techniques now exist for the quantification of the pressed microstructures.  
This  paper  will  report  on  experimental  efforts  that  correlate  directly  measured 
microstructural  characteristics  to  initiation  threshold  behavior  of  three  HMX  based 
materials.  The internal microstructures were revealed using an argon ion cross-sectioning 
technique.  This technique enabled the quantification of density and interface area of the 
pores within the pressed bed using methods of stereology.  These bed characteristics are 
then  compared  to  the  initiation  threshold  behavior  of  the  three  HMX  based  materials 
using an electric gun based test method. 
A  persistent  challenge  that  the  explosive 
community has struggled with is the development 
of  means by  which to clearly quantify the effects 
of  microstructure  on  continuum  level  safety  and 
performance  characteristics.    Historical  methods 
have  often  sought 
to  correlate  bulk  powder 
characteristics  such  as  particle  size  or  specific 
surface  area  to  continuum  level  behavior.    A 
review  of  some  of  those  efforts  as  well  as  our 
research  methodology  will  be 
to  directly  quantify 
characteristics  of  the  pressed  microstructure  and 
attempt  to  correlate  those  changes  to  continuum 
level  initiation  threshold  behavior. 
developed  techniques1  allow  us  to  generate  twodimensional  cross  sections  of  pellets. 
along  with  principles 
borrowed  from  the  field  of  stereology  allow  for 
the quantification of density and specific interface 
area  within  pores  of  the  pellets.    Here  we  will 
assess the ability to correlate those bed features to 
changes  in  an  initiation  threshold  model  based 
upon  the  work  by  James2.    The  James  like 
framework  was  chosen  as  it  targets  initiation 
threshold  behavior 
evaluation  of  pulse  duration  effects  which  have 
been  shown  to  work  well  with  a  wide  range  of 
There  have  been  many  research  efforts  that 
have  investigated  the  effects  of  morphology  on 
initiation  and  failure  behavior.    Khasainov  et  al.3 
reviewed  a  significant  body  of  historical  research 
and  discussed  correlations  between  critical 
detonation  diameter  and  initial  specific  surface 
area per unit volume of heterogeneous explosives.  
Schwarz4  used  an  electric  gun  to  conduct  flyer 
plate impact studies to investigate shock initiation 
threshold sensitivity of HNS-HF HNS-SF HNS-I 
and  HNS-II  pressed 
to  approximately  92 
theoretical maximum density TMD.  The specific 
surface area SSA per unit mass reported was 10 
m2g  2.56  m2g  1.59  m2g  and  0.4  m2g  for  the 
HNS-HF  HNS-SF  HNS-I 
pressure  required  to  initiate  the  HNS  materials 
were 6.3 GPa 6.9 GPa 7.6 GPa and 9.3 GPa for 
the  HNS-HF  -SF  -I  and  II  respectively  when 
using  76  Pm  thick  Kapton  flyers.    Those  results 
suggest there is a reduction in initiation threshold 
increasing  bulk  powder  SSA.  
Furthermore Schwarz reported that the higher the 
SSA the narrower the band of pressures separating 
detonation  from  non-detonation  as  determined 
from a 24 shot threshold test series.  Schwarz also 
reported  a  threshold  pressure  of  8.4  GPa  was 
required to initiate LX-15 which was reported as a 
955 percent  mixture  of  HNS-I  and  Kel-F  for  the 
same  flyer plate.  Honodel5 et al. also utilized an 
electric gun configuration to evaluate the initiation 
threshold behavior of several TATB materials.  In 
that  study  Honodel  et  al.  evaluated  flyers  of 
various thicknesses to quantify the effect of pulse 
duration  on  initiation  threshold  characteristics.  
They  reported  a  reversal  in  sensitivity  when 
considering  the  threshold  velocity  of  the  thickest 
flyers  versus  the  thinnest  flyers.    The  low  SSA 
materials B-226 B-338 and B-474 required impact 
velocities  of  2.22  kms  2.2  kms  and  2.3  kms 
respectively.    The  highest  SSA  material  B-592 
required  a  velocity  of  2.6  kmsec. 
differences  are  small  given 
uncertainty  is  reported  to  be  between  0.08  kms 
and  0.2  kms  for  the  three  test  cases.    For  the 
thinnest  flyers  more  significant  differences  were 
observed.  The B-592 material required a velocity 
of 4.1 kms where the lower SSA materials B-226 
B-338 and B-474 required velocities of 5.4 kms 
5.3  kms  and  5.35  kms  respectively. 
additional  conclusion  of  that  work  was  that  at 
substantially  from  the  critical-energy  initiation 
criterion proposed by Walker and Wasley.    Later 
research  by  James2  provided  a  framework  to 
extend the Walker and Wasley criterion in a  way 
that  better  captures 
the  results  observed  by 
Honodel  et  al.  for  the  thick  and  thin  flyer  cases.  
The  framework  proposed  by  James  is  also  the 
basis for the investigation reported here to quantify 
the effects of microstructure on initiation threshold 
The  extension  of  the  Walker  and  Wasley 
criterion  to  incorporate  a  trigger  condition  as 
proposed  by  James2  is  appealing  as  it  allows  for 
the  quantification  of  the  effects  of  thick  and  thin 
pulses  on  threshold  behavior.    By  using  this 
framework  one  may  quantify  the  effects  that 
microstructure plays on initiation threshold for low 
amplitude and long duration shocks as well as high 
amplitude  short  duration  shock. 
approach one  may probe regimes  where  hot spot 
size number and growth rates may have changing 
roles in domination of bulk response for threshold 
behavior.  In a previous proceeding6 we reported 
on  the  use  of  an  alternate  functional  form  than 
proposed  by  James  to  describe  the  boundary 
between a failed and successful initiation threshold 
condition.    We  have  chosen  an  exponential  form 
shown  in  equation  1  below  along  with  the 
supporting relationships. 
E                         2
                                  3             
           E  E  exp  
P is the pressure Up is the particle velocity and W 
is  the  duration  of  the  pulse  where  all  values  are 
calculated in the unreacted explosive.  The original 
hyperbolic  initiation  threshold  function  proposed 
by  James2  included  two  fitted  constants  which 
were the critical energy fluence Ec and the critical 
specific kinetic energy 6c.  The exponential form 
in  equation  1  relies  upon  three  fitted  constants 
which are Ec 3c and 3a.  3c is the critical power 
flux and represents a critical  trigger condition for 
initiation  threshold  as  is  the  case  with  6c.    The 
third  term  3a  controls  how  rapidly  the  function 
transitions  from  an  energy  fluence  Ec  limited 
condition to a power flux 3c limited condition at 
the knee of the curve.  Initially the viability of our 
approach  was  assessed  using  the  Honodel5  et  al. 
data  by  considering  the  1.8  gcm3  93TMD 
results.  The results of this analysis are shown in 
RX-03-AU - Production
the B-338 and then RX-03-AU materials where the 
SSA  is  4.323  m2g  0.430  m2g  and  then  0.539 
m2g.  This is an example of how the use of SSA of 
the  bulk  powder  is  not  sufficient  to  describe  the 
measured  changes  in  energy  fluence  between  the 
materials  across  large  ranges  of  pulse  durations 
The above suggests the electric gun technique 
implemented  using  a  James  like  threshold  model 
as a basis to design the experiments will enable the 
quantification  of  changes  in  continuum  level 
behavior resulting from microstructural variations.  
With  this  as  a  basis  pure  HMX  materials  were 
recently  evaluated6.    The  work  reported  here 
focuses on the further characterization of the bulk 
powder  and  refinement  of  the  microstructural 
analysis methods.  Additionally we have extended 
our  investigations  to  PBXN-5  which  is  a  mixture 
of  Class  5  HMX  and  Viton  A.    Lastly  we  have 
investigated  the  correction  of  the  threshold  data 
using  the  flyer  thicknesses  as  determined  from 
window  impact  experiments.    This  is  important 
when considering the use of these data for model 
parameterization  versus  relative  assessments  of 
materials.                      
Energetic materials 
Class 3 and 5 HMX materials were evaluated 
respectively.    These  two  materials  were  chosen 
their  vastly  different  bulk  powder 
characteristics.    PBXN-5  was  also  studied  which 
is 95 HMX and 5 Viton where the lot number 
is  BAE12D045-068.    PBXN-5  was  chosen  as  it 
utilizes  Class  5  HMX  and 
facilitate assessments of the effect of binder on the 
characteristics  studied.    Ideally  the  same  lot  of 
pure  Class  5  material  would  have  been  used  to 
formulate  the  PBXN-5  material  but  that  was  not 
the  case  for  this  study.    This  may  affect  the 
certainty  of  the  conclusions  drawn  from  the 
comparison  of  the  pure  Class  5  and  PBXN-5 
material.  The density of all materials studied was 
nominally  1.79  gcm3  which  is  approximately 
94 of the TMD.  The particle size characteristics 
of the bulk HMX materials were measured using a 
laser  light  scattering  technique  with  a  Coulter 
Fig.  1.    Electric  gun  data  for  various  TATB 
materials analyzed using the exponential initiation 
threshold function. 
These  results  indicate  the  variations  in  shock 
strength 3 are smaller than energy fluence E for 
differences are present in energy  fluence  for high 
amplitude  and  short  duration  shocks  low  E  and 
high  3.    Using  critical  energy  fluence  Ec  the 
most  sensitive  material  is  the  B-592  followed  by 
LS100 instrument equipped with a Micro Volume 
Module.  Particle size detection range is from 0.4 
measurement  was  performed  on  a  suspension  of 
the  HMX  in  a  saturated  dispersant  fluid  solution 
5050 by volume of isopropyl alcohol and water.  
The results of those measurements are reported in 
measurements  of  particle  size  distribution  which 
will be a metric utilized in the correlation between 
the  initial  powder  and  our  pressed  bed  materials 
during future studies.  Qualitatively the finer grain 
powders result in a finer more homogeneous void 
structure over the sampling length scale. 
Table 1.  Particle size measurements as quantified 
by a light scattering technique  
Particle Size Distributions Pm 
Microstructure characterization 
Micrographs  of  our  distended  and  pressed 
HMX  materials  are  shown  in  Fig.  2.    The  three 
materials  include  a  Class  3  BAE-101  b 
PBXN-5  BAE-068  and  c  Class  5  BAE-097. 
The  pressed  pellets  were  cross  sectioned  using  a 
JEOL  Cross  Section  Polisher  that  uses  a  broad 
argon  ion  beam  at  voltages  between  2-8  kV1  6.  
The  insets  are  SEM  images  of  the  respective 
distended  powders  note  there  is  no  inset  for 
PBXN-5  since  the  powder  was      unavailable  to 
image.    Qualitatively  one  can  see  for  the  pressed 
beds that  a has long extensive cracking   10 
Pm c has larger particles 10 Pm surrounded 
by  sub-micron  porosity  and  b  is  similar  to  c 
however  with  reduced  fine  void  structure 
possibly  due  to  the  incorporation  of  the  binder.  
From  these  qualitative  observations  one  can  see 
that  morphological  properties  of  the  distended 
final  pressed  bed 
Fig.  2.    SEM  images  of  pressed  beds  for  each 
material a  c.  The inset within each image is 
an  SEM  image  for  the  respective  bulk  powder. 
Three materials include a Class 3 BAE-101 b 
PBXN-5 BAE-068 and c Class 5 BAE-097. 
The resulting 2D image data are analyzed for 
material  heterogeneities  e.g.  inter-  and  intra-pore 
distances.  To aid in analysis the gray scale SEM 
images  were  enhanced  to  increase  contrast  and 
eliminate  as  much  random  detector  noise7  as 
possible.    To  achieve  this  we  utilized  filters  that 
reduce noise  while preserving edge detail of void 
regions  i.e.  an  adaptive  Wiener  or  median  filters 
with a 3 X 3 pixel neighborhood and 2 X 2 pixel 
neighborhoods  respectively.    All  of  the  images 
were processed using the image processing toolkit 
version 8.1 in MatLab version 8.0.0.  We refer 
the  reader  to  a  more  detailed  description  of  the 
analysis in Welle et al.6 
The  following  microstructural  analysis  was 
performed on all three material sets Class 3 Class 
5  and  PBXN-5  pressed  to  a  nominal  density  of 
1.79  gcm3.    Results  from  the  image  analyses  are 
presented below in  
calculation  using  a  sample  size  of  20  values  for 
each  material.  The  threshold  range  of  plusminus 
two  was  used  since  it  represents  a  large  change 
40 in the number of voids detected6.  A point to 
note is the good correlation between the calculated 
densities  using  the  measured  microstructures  and 
the  calculated  nominal  bulk  value  of  94  TMD 
that  was  determined  via  conventional  mass  and 
geometry measurements. 
Table  2  whereby  the  data  was  calculated 
using  well-established  principles  and  assumptions 
of  stereology  isotropic  uniform  and  random 
  The  density  reported  as  a 
percentage  of  TMD  was  calculated  taking  the 
ratio of segmented solid and total image area.  The 
values in parentheses represent a 95 confidence 
segmentation threshold was varied plusminus two 
sample size of 5 per image.  This results in a CI 
Table 2.  Mean values for density in percent TMD interface area and specific interfacial area.  The value 
for  specific  interfacial  area  was  obtained  using  a  E-polymorph  density  of  1.91  gcm3  10.    Values  in 
parentheses are 95 confidence interval. 
Fig.  3  depicts  further  analysis  for  our 
materials.    On  the  right  are  three  Euclidean 
distance  maps  EDMs  whereby  every  pixel 
represents the shortest distance in any direction to 
a void represented by white space.  The plot on 
the  left  is  the  EDM  data  sorted  into  100  equally 
spaced bins representing the distance curve. 
Fig. 3.  Left Distance curves for the PBXN-5 Class 3 and 5 materials.  Data is binned in 100 equally 
spaced bins excluding the void pixels.  Right The white areas in the Euclidean distance maps are the void 
regions and the blue regions are where the distance to the nearest void is the greatest interpreted as cold 
The  distance  curve  for  each  material  is 
representative of 4 images. One can notice that the 
distance map of the Class 3 material is only of a 25 
Pm  width  and  in  Figure  1a  there  are  large    10 
Pm size particles.   
It is important to know that there is a trade-off 
between  properly  resolving  bed  features  and 
capturing a representative or uniform sample set.  
For  these  data  analyses  we  concluded  that  a 
smaller field of view was necessary to resolve void 
sizes and structure i.e. interface area.  We utilize 
multiple images randomly captured throughout the 
to  derive  a  statistically  representative 
sampling  of  the  true  microstructure.    Note  our 
preliminary assessments herein are utilizing only 4 
images  per  material  and  future  analyses  will 
incorporate  multiple  images  from  several  pellets 
for each material using various fields of view. 
Initiation threshold studies 
An electric gun E-Gun composed of a high 
voltage  capacitive  discharge  unit  coupled  to  an 
exploding foil chip was used to generate shocks of 
varying  amplitude  and  duration  to  study  the 
initiation behavior of three HMX based materials.  
E-Guns have been used to study initiation behavior 
of  HNS4  TATB5  PETN  and  PBX-940411  in  a 
similar  fashion  as  done  here.    For  each  flyer 
thickness  a  threshold  study  was  conducted  using 
either 15 or 25 samples.  The data presented here 
are  from  experiments  conducted  using  3.8  mm 
square bridges.  Nominal flyer thicknesses ranged 
from 30 Pm to 55 Pm of Parylene C or 152 Pm to 
229 Pm of a Kapton plus acrylic adhesive laminate 
material.    The  Parylene  C  is  a  vapor  deposited 
material  where  the  Kapton  plus  acrylic  adhesive 
material  is  a  sheet  material  that  is  bonded  to  the 
temperature  to  enable  the  bond.    The  3.8  mm 
square  bridge  results  in  an  area  with  an  effective 
diameter of approximately 4.3 mm.  KleinhanEet 
al.12  previously  studied  initiation  threshold  of 
PBXN-5  at  the  same  density  studied  here  and 
reported a critical ignition velocity as a function of 
spot size for thick flyers 250 Pm.  Those results 
show  the  critical  velocity  for  PBXN-5  stabilizes 
around impact diameters of 4 mm.  This suggests 
chips  using  pressure 
the threshold behavior has become essentially one 
dimensional  at  that  scale.    Consequently  we 
expect  the  pure  HMX  and  PBXN-5  materials 
studied  here  have  similar  one  dimensional 
threshold characteristics. 
Flyer velocity at the mean firing voltage was 
quantified  using  photonic  Doppler  velocimetry.  
This  was  done  by  replacing  the  explosive  pellet 
with  a  PMMA  window. 
quantification of flyer velocity at impact as well as 
the  resultant  particle  velocity  history 
window.    In  general  three  or  more  velocity 
histories  of  the  flyer  and  particle  histories  in  the 
window were used to generate average values for 
each  condition.    Due  to  limited  quantities  of 
exploding  foil  devices  for  some  test  conditions 
impact  data  were  estimated  using 
measurements  with  exploding  foil  devices  from 
different  manufacturing 
particle history in the window was corrected using 
a window correction for PMMA13.  Analysis of the 
post  impact  particle  histories  in  the  window 
indicated the actual pulse durations were indicative 
of thinner flyers than the manufactured conditions.  
The experimentally derived particle history data in 
the  window  was  used  in  conjunction  with  1-D 
CTH  hydrocode  simulations  to  correct  the  flyer 
  This  was  done  by  matching 
calculated  and  measured  pulse  durations  by 
varying  flyer  thickness  in  the  simulation  at  the 
measured flyer velocity at impact.  This method is 
consistent with previous studies14. 
The  pellet  diameters  used  here  were  all  0.5 
inch but the pellet heights ranged from 0.25 inch to 
0.75 inch.  For the pure HMX materials this range 
was  evaluated  to  assess  the  effects  of  column 
height on the measured threshold condition.  Other 
HMX based materials such as LX-10 95 HMX 
5  Viton  binder15  and  PBX-9404  94  HMX 
3  nitrocellulose  3  Chloroethyl  Phosphate11 
have been studied at similar column heights.  LX10  at  1.85  gcm3  97TMD  was  tested  using 
pellets  with  a  7.62  mm  0.3  inch  diameter  and 
7.62  mm  0.3  inch  height15.    Effects  of  pellet 
height  were  specifically  studied  by  Wiengart11  et 
al.  using  PBX-9404  pressed  to  a  density  of  1.84 
gcm3  98TMD.    Pellet  diameter  was  fixed  at 
25.4  mm  but  height  was  ranged  from  6.0  mm  to 
19.1 mm.  A conclusion of that study was that no 
Fig.  4.  PBXN-5  threshold  data  and  fitted  trend 
line.    Calculated  shock  loading  and  unloading 
paths  for  a  Parylene  C  and  Kapton  plus  acrylic 
adhesive flyers are also shown. 
Fig. 5. Class 5 threshold data and fitted trend line. 
the  ranges  of  heights  studied. 
dependence on pellet height was observed.  Here 
the  dependence  was  investigated  using  the  two 
thinner  flyers  cases.    Variations  in  flyer  velocity 
were found to be less than 5 for all but two cases 
importantly  the  calculated  energy  fluence  and 
power flux data do not result in discernable trends 
tied  to  explosive  column  height  for  conditions 
corresponding fitted trend lines using equation 1 
are  shown  in  Fig.  4  through  Fig.  6. 
dimensions  reported  in  the  figure  insets  are  the 
pellet heights tested. 
Fig. 4 reports results for PBXN-5 along with 
the CTH calculated loading paths for a Parylene C 
flyer and a Kapton plus acrylic adhesive laminate 
flyer.  For the Parylene C flyer the loading path in 
the  PBXN-5  is  described  by  a  shock  jump  to  a 
power flux of approximately 1 GWcm2 at impact 
followed  by  an  increase  in  energy  fluence  to  a 
value  of  approximately  0.014  kJcm2.    At  that 
point the relief wave arrives from the rear of the 
flyer and rapidly reduces the pressure and particle 
velocity within the PBXN-5.  The point just prior 
to  the  unloading  of  the  PBXN-5  is  the  condition 
that  satisfies  the  initiation  threshold.    For  the 
Kapton  plus  acrylic  adhesive  laminate  a  two-step 
loading  path  is  present  due  to  the  difference  in 
equations  of  state  of  the  Kapton  and  acrylic 
adhesive.  Initially a power flux of approximately 
0.6  GWcm2  is  achieved  but  then  a  reduction  to 
0.5  GWcm2  occurs  due  to  the  acrylic.    Then  a 
final  unloading  process  occurs  as  the  relief  wave 
from  the  rear  of  the  flyer  reaches  the  PBXN-5 
interface.    The  point  just  prior  to  this  final 
following  figures.    The  initial  higher  amplitude 
power  flux  and  corresponding  energy  fluence 
prior  to  the  first  unloading  is  what  is  used  to 
identify an initiation threshold condition for these 
experiments.    This  was  chosen  as  it  is  the  most 
logical  choice  given  the  shape  of  the  trend  lines 
relative to the loading path.  If a laminate flyer was 
used to probe the trend line location at high power 
flux  conditions  it  is  likely  the  more  complex 
loading  path  to  the    point  would  be  most 
Fig. 6. Class 3 threshold data and fitted trend line. 
Table  3  reports  the  fitted  values  of  critical 
energy  fluence  and  power  flux  that  result  from 
the  experimental  data 
equation  1.    The  values  for  SIA  are  repeated  for 
differences of those values relative to the Class 5 
material.  Fig. 7 shows all three fitted trend lines 
plotted together which shows the general initiation 
threshold behavior of the three materials. 
Table 3.    Critical  energy  fluence  Ec  power  flux 
3c  and  SIA  of  all  materials  with  percent 
difference referenced to the Class 5 material. 
Fig. 7.  Trend lines fit to initiation threshold data. 
Considering microstructure one would expect 
the  PBXN-5  to  have  some  of  the  void  structure 
filled  by  binder  material.    This  implies  the  finer 
void structure is occupied by the binder resulting 
in  larger  distances  between  voids  as  seen  in  the 
Euclidean  distance  map  in  Fig.  3.    This  implies 
that  the  distance  curve  should  shift  to  larger 
distance  values  as  compared  to  the  Class  5 
material  which  is  observed  in  the  distance  curve 
in  Fig.  3.    The  Class  5  material  has  a  greater 
uniformity  of  void  structure  over 
materials.  This high density of voids could act as 
hot  spots  reacting  close  together  thus  increasing 
the  possibly  of  coalescing  to  form  a  critical 
threshold  condition. 
material appears to more closely match the Class 3 
material  in  regards  to  the  SIA.    However  one 
should  proceed  cautiously  with 
interpretation since it is a two component material 
and we are unable to resolve the binder portion at 
Finally  it  appears  to  the  authors  that  it  is 
heterogeneities i.e. interface  area  while  mapping 
larger areas of the sample.  One example would be 
analysis of the void heterogeneity as a function of 
depth from the top of the pellet.  This is critically 
important  to  measure  and  correlate  to  initiation 
threshold  length  scales  and  will  be  the  focus  of 
future efforts. It should be noted that the majority 
of  these  measurements  were  taken  below  the 
surface of the pellet  50  500 Pm. 
The correction of initiation threshold behavior 
to account for actual pulse duration at impact was 
conducted.    This  correction  led  to  as  much  as 
0 reduction in fitted critical energy fluence as 
this  value  is  strongly  dependent  upon  the  pulse 
duration for the thinnest fliers.  At this point only 
small  sample  sizes  have  been  collected  and 
averaged  to  quantify  actual  flyer  thicknesses  at 
impact.    Thus  far  we  have  calculated  a  percent 
reduction  of  flyer  thickness  to  be  approximately 
20-30 for the Parylene C flyers.  This was found 
to  be  the  case  for  both  the  30  and  50  Pm  flyer 
thicknesses.  The trends seen in Fig. 7 and Table 3 
are  the  same  regardless  of  the  pulse  duration 
correction  but  the  percent  differences  did  change 
as  much  as  17  for  calculated  Ec  values.    The 
general trend observed was the percent differences 
calculated  decreased  when  the  corrections  were 
applied.    Future  work  will  include  larger  sample 
sizes  to  facilitate  more  accurate  determination  of 
actual pulse thickness at impact. 
threshold  behavior  or  are  used 
If  initiation  threshold  data  sets  are  to  be 
compared  to  other  measurement  techniques  that 
parameterize  reactive  flow  models  correction  of 
the  data  can  be  important.    It  is  unclear  what 
historical  E-Gun  data  have  been  corrected  to 
account for actual pulse durations at impact so this 
should be considered when choosing how to utilize 
specific  interfacial  area  SIA  of  the  pores  was 
results  showed  an 
accompanied  by  a  decrease  in  Ec
materials.    Microstructures  of  PBXN-5  have  now 
been  characterized  along  with  the  execution  of 
initiation threshold studies.  Although PBXN-5 is 
composed of Class 5 HMX Ec is more similar to 
the Class 3 material.  The SIA of PBXN-5 is 51 
less  than  the  Class  5  material  where  Ec  is  117 
larger as shown in Table 3.  When considering 3c 
the  PBXN-5  material  was  found  to  have  a  larger 
3c than either of the pure HMX  materials.   3c is 
interpreted  as  a  critical  trigger  condition  so  the 
pressures  to  be  experienced  prior  to  successful 
initiation of the PBXN-5 material.  The increase in 
Ec of PBXN-5 relative to the Class 5 HMX  may 
be  indicative  of  the  reduction  in  pore  specific 
interface  area  and  may  be  attributable  to  the 
binder as previously discussed.  The increase in Ec 
measurements  of  Schwarz4  when  considering  the 
results  for  the  pure  HNS-I  versus  HNS-I  plus 
binder.    That  study  only  reported  on  one  flyer 
thickness  so  no  comparisons  can  be  made 
regarding  the  effect  of  binder  addition  on 3c  and 
is  generally  consistent  with 
inert  binder  requires 
The  trend  of  decreasing  SIA  leading  to 
increases  in  Ec  is  also  observed  when  comparing 
the Class 3 and 5 materials.  A 180 change in Ec 
is  accompanied  by  a  -45  change  in  SIA  when 
referencing the Class 5 material.  Due to the small 
Ec present for Class 5 the nominally 30 Pm thick 
flyers  did  not  map  out  3  values  as  high  as  what 
was tested for the Class 3 and PBXN-5 materials.  
Future studies should include thinner flyers for the 
finer  grained  material  to  target  correspondingly 
high 3 values.  This will better ensure Ec may be 
calculated over similar changes in shock amplitude 
Similar  percent  differences 
calculated  for  the  TATB  results  reported  by 
Honodel when considering the B-592 and RX-03AU  materials.    As  with  TATB  the  pure  HMX 
materials  exhibited  less  significant  differences  in 
minimally support the initiation processes are  not 
significantly  changing  for 
the  microstructures 
  This  suggests  conditions  necessary 
Khasainov3  et  al.  discussed  the  effects  of 
specific surface area per unit volume on initiation 
sensitivity.  They proposed that when PPignition1 
the  formation  of  hot  spots  within  the  bed  is  fast 
resulting in sensitivity being controlled by hot spot 
  Here  we  saw  an  increase  in 
sensitivity  when  33c  which  is  comparable  to 
PPignition  when  SIA 
accompanied  by  a  reduction  in  Ec.    This  result  is 
consistent  with  what  was  proposed  previously  by 
Khasainov3  et  al.  for  high  amplitude  shock 
threshold  model  coupled 
We  have  evaluated  the  use  of  a  James  like 
measurements of microstructure.  This was done to 
establish a sensitive continuum level measurement 
of  sensitivity  to  microstructural  features.    We 
found smaller changes in critical power flux 8 
between  the  pure  Class  3  and  5  HMX  materials 
than  Ec  180.    The  inclusion  of  binder  to  the 
PBXN-5  formulation  resulted  in  increases  in  3c 
33 and Ec 117 relative to the pure Class 5 
material.  We also observed that Ec is significantly 
reduced  with  increased  SIA.    Lastly  the  pure 
material trends are consistent with the Honodel et 
al.5  data  when  analyzed  using 
investigated in this work. 
indicate  conducting 
threshold studies using the proposed framework is 
a  reasonable  means  by  which  to  tie  measured 
microstructure  to  a  continuum  level  sensitivity 
metric.    This  is  important  as  these  types  of 
experiments  may  be  a  means  by  which 
parameterize  models  that  explicitly  incorporate 
terms  sensitive  to  microstructure.    Future  work 
should include statistically relevant sample sizes to 
more  clearly  identify  the  significance  of  the 
differences quantified here. 
We  investigated  the  effects  of  correcting  the 
initiation threshold data to account for actual pulse 
durations.    The  Ec  values  were  most  strongly 
affected  as  they  are  a  function  of  temporal 
characteristics  of  the  thinnest  shock  conditions.  
We  expect  the  flyer  thickness  correction  to  be 
important if these data sets are to be compared to 
conducting relative comparisons. 
threshold  behavior  or  are  used 
flow  models  versus 
Natural  next  steps  for  this  work  will  be  to 
conduct  further  studies  to  evaluate  these  trends 
more  broadly.    Coupled  experimentation  with 
modeling  is  necessary  to  better  understand  the 
complex  relationships  between  shock 
conditions  and  bed  characteristics  that  lead  to 
critical hot spot formation. 
We  thankfully  acknowledge  the  Air  Force 
Research  Laboratory  for  the  funding  provided  to 
conduct  this  work.    We  would  like  to  thank  the 
significant contributions of Michael Meadows and 
Emmanuel  Morales  for  their  expert  experimental 
support  and  Chadd  May  for  helpful  input  and CREST Models for PBX 9501 and PBX 9502 
C. A. Handley H. J. Lacy B. D. Lambourn N. J. Whitworth and H. R. James 
AWE Aldermaston Reading Berkshire RG7 4PR UK 
Abstract. New CREST reactive-burn models for PBX 9501 and PBX 9502 explosives are 
described. The new models retain the capability of previous CREST models to simulate a 
wide  range  of  shock  initiation  and  detonation  phenomena  including  the  effects  of 
porosity  and  initial  temperature.  More-robust  analytic  equations  of  state  improve  the 
models applicability to and usability in diverse hydrocode simulations.  
This  paper  describes  the  development  and 
testing  of  a  new  CREST  model  for  PBX  9501  a 
conventional  high  explosive  and  an  updated 
model for PBX 9502 an insensitive explosive. The 
models incorporate new robust analytic equations 
of  state  EOS  and  reaction  rates  appropriate  for 
both  the  shock  initiation  and  detonation  regimes. 
Space  does  not  permit  all  the  equations  and 
coefficients  to  be  listed  in  this  paper  so  only  the 
framework of the models will be discussed below.  
In common with previous CREST models the 
new  models  use  a  finite-strain  EOS  for  the  nonreacted  explosive  a  modified  JWL  EOS  for  the 
detonation products and the ISE mixture model10 
which  assumes that  pressure  but not  temperatureequilibrium applies. The non-reacted explosive lies 
on  an  isentrope  through  its  shock  state  so  that  a 
function  of  entropy  Zs  can  always  be  calculated 
from  the  EOS.  This  function  is  constant  between 
shocks  which  would  not  be  the  case  if  pressure 
and  temperature-equilibrium  were  both  applied 
and is a convenient measure of shock strength for 
use  in  the  reaction  rate  equations.  Both  the  nonreacted 
constructed  at  theoretical  maximum  density  and 
detonation-products  EOS 
In  recent  years  the  CREST  reactive  burn 
model1  has  had  success  in  modelling  a  range  of 
initiation  and  detonation  propagation 
phenomena in polymer bonded explosives PBX. 
Following  a  detailed  analysis2  of  LANLs 
embedded  particle-velocity  gauge  gas-gun  data34 
the  reaction  rate  in  CREST  was  formulated  to 
depend on a function of entropy of the non-reacted 
explosive. This allows phenomena such as doubleshock desensitisation1 and the effects  of porosity5
and  initial  temperature6  on  the  Pop-plot  to  be 
simulated without any modifications to the model. 
In  contrast  the  majority  of  reactive  burn  models 
use  pressure-dependent reaction  rates  and  are not 
As  CREST  has  been  developed  over  the  last 
decade  the  model  has  become  steadily  more 
capable and robust as understanding has increased. 
Early  CREST  models  e.g.  the  first  PBX  9502 
model8 had reaction rates tuned only to sustainedshock  particle-velocity  gauge  data  and  did  not 
represent  the  observed  variation  of  detonation 
velocity with explosive charge size9 known as the 
size-effect curve. In addition the equations of state 
were  not  robust  in  all  regimes  experienced  in 
hydrocode simulations.  
extreme expansion vvo60. In addition the last 
criterion  was  difficult  to  satisfy  for  PBX  9502 
where  the  thermal  expansion  coefficient  for  the 
non-reacted explosive falls slightly negative above 
800K  which  is  above  the  melting  temperature. 
Accepting  this  non-compliance  was  one  of  the 
compromises that had to be made when fitting the 
EOS to diverse and sometimes-contradictory data.  
Overall the new CREST EOS are robust and 
more widely-applicable than for previous models.   
The  reaction  rate  equations  are  the  same  as 
those  used  previously  for  PBX  9502  in  CREST5. 
The total reaction rate    is the weighted sum of 
  and two initially-cubic 
an initially-linear rate 
The parameters mi and bi are power-law functions 
of  Zs  with  coefficients  ci.  The  coefficients  c0-c15
not all of  which are active have been calibrated 
by trial and error using hydrocode simulations of 
a  subset  of  sustained-shock  gas-gun  experiments 
five shots for PBX 9501 and four for PBX 9502 
and  the  size-effect  curve  for  both  explosives 
which  gives  the  variation  in  detonation  velocity 
with charge diameter for unconfined rate sticks.  
The  calibration  process  was  simplified  by  a 
new  insight  that  the most  important  parameter  is 
b1  since  it  largely  determines  both  the  time  and 
magnitude  of  the  peak   .  If  the  coefficients 
governing b1Zs are chosen to ensure that the time 
to  peak  particle  velocity  is  fairly  close  to  that 
observed in sustained-shock gas-gun shots and the 
size-effect  curve  is  in  the  right  regime  then  it  is 
relatively easy to adjust the coefficients controlling 
the m parameters b2 and b3 to fine-tune the model.  
The  resulting  reaction  rates  are  illustrated  in 
Figure 2. The entropies relevant to shock initiation  
the  snowplough  model  is  used  to  account  for 
New EOS have been developed for PBX 9501 
and  PBX  9502  by  fitting  to  available  data 
Hugoniot  and  over-driven  detonation  data.  The 
over-driven data  are used both for the detonation 
products and as an upper limit for the non-reacted 
Hugoniot.  This  helps  to  ensure  that  the  EOS  for 
the  non-reacted  explosive  and  for  the  detonation 
products  are  compatible  because  in  all  regimes 
experienced  in  hydrocode  simulations  the  EOS 
surface for the detonation products must lie above 
that for the non-reacted explosive11. The difficulty 
is that in the region of the Chapman-Jouguet CJ 
point  Grneisen    is  typically  1  for  the  nonreacted  explosive  and  0.5  for  the  detonation 
products  so  the  two  EOS  surfaces  will  cross.  To 
avoid them crossing the approach taken in CREST 
is to assume the same dependence of  on specific 
volume v for both EOS. 
The  aim  in  constructing  the  new  EOS  was 
that  in  addition  to  fitting  the  available  data 
reasonably  well  extrapolations  into  other  regions 
of the EOS surface should be plausible within the 
confines  of  a  single-phase  Mie-Grneisen  EOS. 
Specifically  the  EOS  should  be  well-behaved  in 
all  the regimes  encountered  in  diverse  hydrocode 
simulations. A number of robustness criteria have 
been devised to meet these aims 
The calculated Hugoniots for the non-reacted 
explosive  and the  detonation  products  should 
fit  the  experimental  data  including  hot  and 
cold data if available reasonably well. 
the  non-reacted  explosive 
should  be  well-behaved  for  a  wide  range  of 
Isentropes  for  the  non-reacted  explosive  and 
for the detonation products should contain no 
minima or maxima in pressure p for p  0. 
Temperature  of  the  non-reacted  explosive 
should  increase  monotonically  with  specific 
volume in expansion along p  0. 
It is our experience that reactive-burn EOS that fail 
to meet these robustness criteria often suffer from 
difficulties in hydrocode simulations. 
These  criteria  were  satisfied  for  PBX  9501 
and  PBX  9502  in  most  regimes  likely  to  be 
experienced  in  simulations  except  regions  of 
Fig.  2.  CREST  reaction  rates  for  PBX  9501  and 
PBX  9502  at  the  entropies  ZS  in  Mbar  cm3g 
relevant to shock initiation above and detonation 
propagation below. Also shown by dashed lines 
is the extent of reaction . 
are  significantly  different  for  the  two  explosives 
because PBX 9501 a conventional high explosive 
runs  to  detonation  in  10mm  from  input  pressures 
of 3GPa and ZS0.0004 Mbar cm3g whereas the 
insensitive explosive PBX 9502 requires p12GPa 
and ZS0.0030 Mbar cm3g for the same 10mm run 
distance. In order to compare the reaction rates in a 
meaningful way Figure 2 shows reaction rates for 
entropies that span the input-shock strengths of the 
experimental data used to calibrate the models for 
PBX 9501 and PBX 9502.  
Figures 3 and 4 illustrate the typical quality of 
the fits obtained. For the gas-gun data the colours 
represent the different embedded-gauge depths the 
jagged  and  smooth  lines  show  the  experimental 
data and CREST simulations respectively. 
In the shock initiation regime Figure 2 shows 
that the two CREST models have similar time to  
Fig.  3.  Fit to  calibration  data  for  PBX  9501  two 
sustained-shock  gas-gun  shots3  top  and  middle 
and unconfined size-effect curve21 bottom. 
peak  and  magnitude  of  the  peak  reaction  rate 
consistent  with  the  run  to  detonation  distance  in 
the gas-gun experiments for both explosives being 
the same order of magnitude an easily-measurable 
3  to  12mm.  However  the  shape  of  the  reaction 
rates are different. The initial slope of the reaction  
PBX  9502  comprises  fast  and  slow  components 
giving  a  long  reaction  tail.  This  is  achieved  by 
using the third reaction rate 
in the  detonation regime  allowing the  PBX  9502 
model to reproduce the complex size-effect curve 
shape  in  Figure  4.  The  PBX  9501  reaction  rate 
   and  so  has  no  tail  giving  the 
simple size-effect curve shape in Figure 3. 
In the detonation regime Figure 2 shows that 
the fast reaction duration is shorter for PBX 9501 
than  for  PBX  9502  and  correspondingly  the 
magnitude of the peak reaction rate is higher. The 
duration  and  magnitude  of  the  reaction  rate  are 
intimately related because the area under the 
curve gives the total extent of reaction total which 
tends  to  1  for  plane  detonation  waves.  Note  that 
CREST  reaction  rates  give  total    1  in  shock 
initiation  simulations  and 
The reaction durations which are constrained 
by the requirement to fit the size-effect curve are 
not dissimilar to those quoted in the literature. At 
detonation  entropies  CREST  takes  6ns  to  reach 
0.90  for  PBX  9501  compared  to  Menikoffs 
value12 of 4ns. For PBX 9502 the model has a fast 
reaction that takes 35ns to reach 0.85 and a slow 
reaction that takes a further 150ns to get to 0.99. 
Velocimetry  data13  suggest  that  the  fast  reaction 
lasts  10-20ns  with  the  overall  reaction  duration 
being  500ns  in insensitive  high  explosives.  This 
adds to the body  of evidence in the literature that 
detonation  reaction  zone  lengths  are  10-5m  for 
HMX-based plastic-bonded explosives and 10-3m 
for TATB explosives. 
Overall Figures 3 and 4 show that while the 
CREST models are clearly not perfect the results 
are close to the experimental data and comparable 
to  the  best  reactive-burn  models  in  the  literature. 
This  shows  that  the  strategy  of  fitting  CREST 
reaction  rates  to  shock  initiation  and  detonation 
data simultaneously has been successful. Owing to 
the fast reaction rates fine meshing is required to 
achieve  convergence  in  hydrocode  simulations. 
Meshing  of  50  zonesmm  is  recommended  for 
shock  initiation.  For  detonation  propagation  in 
PBX  9502  at  least  20  and  as  many  as  80 
zonesmm  are  necessary  to  model  sharp  corner 
turning  and  detonation  failure.  In  PBX  9501 
Fig.  4.  Fit  to  calibration  data  for  PBX  9502  a 
sustained-shock  gas-gun  shot4  above  and  the 
unconfined  size-effect  curve2223  below.  Rate 
stick  simulations  used  meshing  of  20  40  or  80 
zones mm dependent on the diameter. 
rate governs the growth of shock strength with the 
steeper  initial  reaction  rate  for  PBX  9502  giving 
greater shock-front growth in gas-gun simulations 
than for PBX 9501. The effect of this can be seen 
in Figures 3 and 4 where the shock front growth is 
much  weaker  for  PBX  9501  gas-gun  shots  s1075 
and s1162 than for PBX 9502 shot 2s-86.  
The late-time tail of the reaction rate is more 
important in the detonation regime than for shock 
initiation  since  it  controls  the  velocity  of  curved 
detonation waves. This is because the sonic point 
moves forwards from the end of the reaction zone 
for a plane detonation wave to somewhere on the 
tail  of  the  reaction  rate  for  curved  detonation 
waves  and any  energy  released  beyond  the  sonic 
point  is  not  available  to  support  the  detonation 
wave. Consistent with other models for insensitive 
explosives  in  the  literature  the  reaction  rate  for 
meshing of 100 and 200 zonesmm is needed for 
detonation propagation and failure respectively. 
The  unconfined  detonation  failure  diameters 
in rate sticks are calculated to be 1.5 to 1.6mm for 
PBX  9501  and  6.0  to  6.5mm  for  PBX  9502 
compared to the experimental values of 1.52mm 
and  7.5  to  8.0mm.  It  was  found  that  the  simple 
shape  of  the  size-effect  curve  for  PBX  9501 
Figure  3  makes  it  relatively-easy  to  match  the 
failure  diameter.  Ways  to  improve  the  agreement 
for  PBX  9502  whilst  maintaining  the  morecomplex shape of the size-effect  curve Figure 4 
will be investigated in future. 
Testing against 1D and 2D data 
It has been demonstratede.g.  5624 that previous 
CREST  models  for  PBX  9502  were  capable  of 
predicting a variety of data that had not been used 
for  calibration  without  changing  the  EOS  or 
reaction rate coefficients. Unfortunately their EOS 
were not robust in some hydrocode configurations 
e.g.  where  partially-reacted  explosive  was  pulled 
into tension at the edges of unconfined rate sticks 
and in 2D initiation threshold simulations. 
This section will demonstrate that the updated 
CREST model  for PBX 9502 and the new model 
for  PBX  9501  are  just  as  capable  of  predicting 
shock initiation and detonation phenomena. Owing 
to their robust EOS the models can be applied in 
diverse  hydrocode  simulations.  Space  does  not 
permit  all  examples  to  be  included  here  so 
companion  papers  discuss  PBX  9502  corner 
turning14 and double shock simulations15.  
Porosity-dependence of the Pop plot 
It has previously  been shown5 that thanks to 
the combined effect of entropy-dependent reaction 
rates and the snowplough model CREST is able to 
account for the effect  of initial porosity on shock 
sensitivity i.e. on the Pop plot  by dialling-in the 
correct density without making any other changes 
to the model. The new models for PBX 9501 and 
PBX 9502 are no exception. 
Over  the  limited  range  of  porosities  0.9  to 
1.8 for which data are available Figure 5 shows 
that CREST correctly represents the spread in the 
Pop  plot  data  for  PBX9501.  At  the  density  of 
1.826gcm3  used  to  calibrate  the  reaction  rate  to 
gas-gun  data  not  including  the  Pop  plot  the 
simulated  run-to-detonation  distances  are  slightly 
longer  than  observed  experimentally.  This  is 
consistent  with  the  particle-velocity  gauge  traces 
e.g. for s1162 in Fig. 3 where the late-time shock 
growth  in  the  simulations  is  slightly  behind  the 
experimental  data.  The  disagreement  with  the 
lowest-pressure PBX 9501 data point by Chidester 
is likely to be at least partly because the embedded 
manganin pressure gauges used in this experiment 
have not been represented in the simulations.  
A previous CREST model for PBX 9502 was 
able  to  predict  the  effect  of  porosity  on  the  Pop 
plot  of  LX-17  a  similar  insensitive  explosive  for 
which  data  are  available  for  up  to  7  porosity5. 
Having been calibrated at a density  of 1.89gcm3 
Figure 5 shows that the new model for PBX 9502 
gives a good fit to the LX-17 data at 1.81gcm3 and 
1.90gcm3.  The  error  bars  on  the  CREST  results 
relate  to  the  approximate  method  used  to  extract 
the run distance from the simulations. 
Fig. 5. Pop plots for PBX 9501 above and PBX 
9502 below at several initial densities. 
Fig.  7.  Simulations  of  1D  initiation  threshold 
data19  for  thin  mylar  flyers.  Experimental  data 
lines  with  error  bars  and  simulations  filled 
points  for  a  go  open  points  for  a  no-go  are 
for three initial densities.  
mm  whereas  in  reality  the  8.5mm  rod  failed  to 
initiate the explosive. 
Results  for  impact  of  the  17mm  steel  rod 
which  is  well  above  the  initiation  threshold  are 
given in Figure 8. Although the simulated velocity 
histories  are  similar in magnitude  to  the data  the 
initial  reaction  is  too  vigorous  and  consequently 
the  release  wave  is  too  strong.  Nevertheless  the 
predicted run distance of 7.6mm is consistent with 
the experimental result of 6-8mm. In addition 1D 
thin-pulse shock-initiation data for PBX 9501 not 
illustrated  show  that  for  a  given  flyer  impact 
velocity CREST simulations are too reactive. 
To summarise CREST seems to over-predict 
the reaction rate in initiation threshold geometries 
where release waves dominate the hydrodynamics. 
This  is  because  entropy-dependent  reaction  rates 
are used in CREST and while the temperature and 
pressure both fall across release waves the entropy 
is constant. As has been discussed previously7 the 
fall  in  reaction  rate  across  release  waves  is  not 
captured by entropy-dependent models.  
entropy  and  temperature-dependent  model  might 
be  better  two  alternative  models  were  developed 
for  PBX  9501.  These  used  the  same  EOS  and 
reaction rate equations 1-4 but with either bZs 
and  mTs  or  bTs and  mTs  where  Ts  is  the 
temperature  of  the  non-reacted  explosive.  It  had 
been hoped that having been calibrated to the 
Fig.  6.  Pop  plot  for  PBX  9502  at  different initial 
Pop-plot data are also available for PBX 9502 
at different temperatures -55 23 and 75C 1617. 
By  specifying  the  initial  density  and  specific 
internal  energy  of  the  explosive  to  be  consistent 
with the initial temperature CREST can be applied 
to these data without changing the EOS or reaction 
the  experimental  uncertainties 
associated  with  the  initial  density  and  lot-to-lot 
variations  at  the  temperature  extremes  Figure  6 
shows  that  like  a  previous  CREST  model6  for 
PBX9502  the  new  model  matches  the  trend  in 
shock sensitivity with temperature. 
Initiation thresholds 
CREST simulations of 1D initiation threshold 
composition  as  PBX  9502  have  been  published 
previously8.  Figure  7  shows  that  the  new  PBX 
9502  model  is  just  as  capable  of  reproducing  the 
data for thicker flyers. As for the earlier model the 
impact velocities needed to cause initiation for thin 
flyers  are  lower  than  the  experimental  data. 
Unpublished simulations of 2D thin-flyer initiation 
of  PBX  9502  also  show  that  CREST  underestimates  the  velocity  of  the  initiation  threshold. 
The reasons for this are discussed below. 
Recent rod-impact experiments on PBX 9501 
by  Gustavsen  et  al.  at  LANL  are  discussed  in  a 
companion paper by James18. His simulations have 
been  repeated  using  the  new  CREST  model  for 
PBX 9501. At an impact velocity of 0.74kms the 
model detonates within the depth of the PBX 9501 
sample for steel rods of diameter 8.5 12.7 and 17 
Fig.  8.  CREST  simulations  of  an  experiment  in 
which a 17mm-diameter steel rod impacts a 6mmthick  disc  of  PBX  9501  backed  by  a  PMMA 
velocimetry window at 0.74kms. 
same  sustained-shock  and  size-effect  data  as  the 
CREST  model  the  mixed  entropytemperature 
model or the pure-temperature model would give a 
better  fit  to  PBX  9501  thin-pulse  initiation  data. 
Unfortunately  neither  alternative  model  was  an 
improvement.  Building  upon  the  meso-scale20  a 
reaction rate  based  on  both  Zs  and  the  detonation 
products temperature Tg will be tried in future. 
Detonation wave shapes and velocities 
Although  the  detonation  velocities  measured 
in  unconfined  cylindrical  rate  sticks  have  been 
used  to  calibrate  the  CREST  reaction  rates 
additional data are available from some rate sticks 
that  were  fired  with  a  diagnostic  to  measure  the 
steady-state  detonation  wave  shape  at  the  end  of 
the  explosive  charge.  For  PBX  9501  only  two 
wave shape records at the same nominal diameter 
of  41.5  mm  were  available21  for  this  study.  For 
PBX  9502  there  are  data  at  10  18  and  50  mm 
Wave  shapes  were  extracted  from  CREST 
rate-stick  simulations  using  massless  Lagrangian 
particles  embedded  in  the  Eulerian  computational 
grid  recording  the  time  at  which  each  particles 
detonation  velocity  from  the  same  simulation  to 
convert  this  to  a  wave  shape.  This  method  gives 
smooth results even for relatively-coarse meshing. 
Results  are  compared  to  the  experimental  data  in 
rose  above  0.1Mb  and  using 
The PBX 9501 rate-stick simulations were run 
using a variety  of mesh resolutions but the wave 
shape  was  extracted  from  the  100  zonesmm 
simulation  using  a  different  method  than  for 
coarse-resolution  simulations  so  its  legend  entry 
is  in  brackets.  Whilst  not  fully  mesh-converged 
for the high wave curvatures at the edge of the rate 
stick radius  15mm the simulated wave shapes 
seem  to  be  a  different  shape  to  the  experimental 
data.  In  particular  the  simulated  detonation  wave 
is  too  highly-curved  at  intermediate  radii  5  to 
15mm.  The  reasons  for  this  are  not  currently 
understood  given  that  the  fit  to  the  size-effect 
curve for PBX 9501 in Figure 3 is excellent. 
In contrast Figure 9 shows that the simulated 
wave shapes for PBX 9502 lie close to the data at 
all three diameters consistent with the good fit to 
the  size-effect  curve  in  Figure  4.  The  rate  stick 
simulations were run at coarser mesh resolution 
Fig.  9.  Detonation  wave  shapes  from  ambienttemperature  rate-stick  simulations  above  PBX 
9501  at  41.5  mm  charge  diameter21  and  below 
PBX 9502 at the diameters indicated22. 
Bi-layer experiments 
Recent gas-gun shots fired at LANL on PBX 
9502 backed by a thin layer of PBX 950125 test the 
combined capabilities of both CREST models. The 
experiments  used  a  7mm-thick  Kel-F81  flyer  to 
shock a 20mm-thick PBX 9502 sample backed by 
3mm of PBX 9501 and a LiF window. Embedded 
particle-velocity  gauges  were  mounted  on  an 
angled  plane  towards  the  rear  of  the  PBX  9502 
sample  to  record  any  reaction  growth.  Stirrup 
gauges were used to record velocities at the Kel-F 
PBX  9502  impact  surface  and  at  the  PBX  9502 
PBX  9501  interface.  In  addition  photon  doppler 
velocimetry PDV was fielded at the rear interface 
between the PBX 9501 and the LiF.  
Three shots were fired with impact velocities 
of  1.643  1.912  and  2.311  mms.  For  the  third 
experiment  shot  2s-574  the  impact  pressure  of 
10.2GPa detonates the PBX 9502 by the depth of 
the  particle-velocity  gauges  many  of  which  did 
not  record  correctly  beyond  the  arrival  time.  The 
experimental  data  are  shown  in  Figure  11  along 
with  results  from  mesh-resolved  100  zonesmm 
CREST  simulations.  All  three  simulations  predict 
behaviour that agrees with the experiments 2s-566 
and  2s-573  correctly  contain  a 
unreactive shock in the PBX 9502 followed by run 
to  detonation  in  the  PBX  9501  while  both 
explosives detonate in shot 2s-574. 
The  over-prediction  of  the  von  Neumann 
spike  state  for  these  and  other  experiments  e.g. 
see Fig. 7 in reference 1 is a consistent feature of 
CREST  simulations.  The  spike  state  is  governed 
by the EOS of both the non-reacted explosive and 
the detonation products it can be calculated from 
the  intersection  of  the  Rayleigh  line  from  the 
initial  conditions  through  the  CJ  state  with  the 
Hugoniot of the non-reacted explosive. Measuring 
the  von  Neumann  spike  in  experiments  requires 
resolution  and  although 
current diagnostics may be adequate for insensitive 
explosives  like  PBX  9502  they  are  insufficient13
for conventional explosives like PBX 9501. Since 
accurate  data  are  not  available  no  attempt  has 
been made to tune CRESTs spike state. 
The excellent fit to the data in Figure 11 gives 
a tantalising glimpse of CRESTs ability to model 
two-explosive configurations. CREST simulations  
for the 50mm rate stick than for the smaller ones. 
Nevertheless calculations at 20 and 40 zonesmm 
show  that  the  wave  shape  is  converged  at  these 
two  different  densities 
Rate  stick  data  are  also  available2223  for  hot 
and cold PBX 9502. CREST simulations were run 
experimental uncertainties in the initial density. At 
-55C the estimated average experimental density 
of  1.912  gcm3  is  slightly  higher  than the  density 
of 1.885gcm3 that gives the best match to the cold 
Hugoniot  and  Pop-plot  data.  The  estimated  and 
best-match densities at 75C are 1.867gcm3 and 
1.873gcm3  respectively.  Figure  10  shows  better 
the  simulated  detonation 
velocities  and  the  experimental  data  than  was 
achieved with the previous PBX 9502 model24. 
The fit to hot and cold PBX 9502 detonation 
wave  shape  data  not  shown  has  also  improved 
although it is still not quite as good as for ambient 
temperature Fig. 9. 
Fig. 10. Fit to unconfined size-effect data for PBX 
9502 at -55C above and 75C below.  
dependent reaction rates have been calibrated to a 
sub-set  of  sustained-shock  initiation  data  and  the 
detonation  size-effect  curve  giving  reaction  zone 
durations  that  vary  from  several  microseconds  in 
the shock initiation regime to tens of nanoseconds 
in  the  detonation  regime.  It  has  been  shown  in 
Figures 5-11 that both CREST models are capable 
of simulating a wide range of shock initiation and 
detonation phenomena without changing the EOS 
or reaction-rate coefficients. Particularly notable is 
CRESTs ability to predict the effect of changes in 
porosity and initial temperature.  
The  EOS  and  reaction-rate  coefficients  are 
currently  calibrated  manually  a  process  which  is 
both  time-consuming  and  dependent  on  personal 
skill and experience. Future work will include the 
development of an automatic tool to help calibrate 
CREST and other explosive models used at AWE. 
We are very grateful to Rick Gustavsen et al. 
at LANL for providing us with their gas-gun data. Spectroscopic Analysis of Time-Resolved Emission from Shocked Explosive 
Jeffrey J. Kay Brook A. Jilek Ryan R. Wixom Robert Knepper Alex Tappan and David L. Damm 
Sandia National Laboratories 
Sandia National Laboratories 
Albuquerque NM 87185 
Abstract. We have conducted a series of time-resolved spectroscopic measurements that 
aim to characterize the first reactions that occur during shock initiation of high explosives.  
We  employ  time-  and  wavelength-resolved  emission  spectroscopy  to  analyze  light 
emitted  from  shocked  thin  explosive  films.    This  unique  combination  of  specially 
designed  samples  and  broadband  time-resolved  spectrometry  allows  us  to  capture 
emission immediately following the shock front.  In this talk we present spectrally- and 
temporally-resolved optical emission spectra from shocked hexanitroazobenzene HNAB 
and hexanitrostilbene HNS samples.  The emission features observed in the spectra are 
assigned  to  electronic  transitions  of  molecular  fragments  C2  CN  and  NO2  and  the 
implications  of  these  findings  on  our  understanding  of  the  shock  initiation  process  are 
initiate  chemical  reactions 
Understanding  the  mechanism  by  which 
explosives  is  key  to  understanding  their  unique 
and  defining  property  the  ability  to  undergo 
rapid  explosive  decomposition  in  response  to 
mechanical  stimulus.    Although  initiation  of 
in  explosives  has  been  studied 
experimentally  and  computationally  for  many 
decades  and  promising  theories  of  initiation 
have been developed 1-5 the nature of even the 
first  chemical  reactions  that  occur  during  shock 
initiation  are  not  definitively  known.  To 
predictively  understand how  explosives respond 
to  shock  the  detailed  sequence  of  events  that 
occurs  during  shock  initiation    mechanical 
deformation energy transfer bond breakage and 
first chemical reactions  must be understood at 
the quantum-mechanical level.   
theories of shock initiation have been developed.  
One  theory  developed  by  Dlott  and  Fayer  1 
and Tokmakoff Dlott and Fayer 2 is a thermal 
heating mechanism termed phonon up-pumping 
that  explains  initiation  of  chemical  reactions  in 
terms  of  phonon-to-vibrational  energy  transfer.  
In  this  mechanism  energy  is  transferred  from 
lattice  phonons  to  molecular  vibrations  via 
anharmonically-coupled 
doorway  vibrational  modes  of  the  molecule.  
explosive  molecules 
vibrational  modes  of  the  molecule  until  bond 
breakage occurs.  Another theory developed by 
Gilman 3-4 Kuklja and Kunz 5 and Kuklja 
et  al.  6-7  is  an  athermal  initiation  mechanism 
that  explains  initiation  of  chemical  reactions  in 
terms  of  pressure-induced  band  gap  closure.  
Under uniaxial compression of the crystal lattice 
the difference in energy between the valence and 
conduction  bands  i.e.  band  gap  decreases 
allowing  spontaneous  or 
electronic transitions to occur.  As the transition 
from  the  ground  state  to  electronically-excited 
cyclotrimethylene  trinitramine  RDX  involves 
promotion  of  bonding  electrons  to  antibonding 
orbitals electronic excitation by this mechanism 
instantaneous  bond 
breakage  in  particular  homolytic  cleavage  of 
the R-NO2 bond.  Both theories cleverly explain 
various  aspects  of  initiation    in  particular  the 
sensitization  of  materials  by  defects  and 
formation  of  hot  spots    and  the  theories  are 
not necessarily in conflict as each may occur in 
parallel or during different stages of the initiation 
and  detonation  processes.    Our  aim  here  is  to 
eventually test aspects of theories such as these 
information about the initiation mechanism. 
In this work we aim to observe products of 
the  initial  reactions  that  occur  during  shock 
initiation  by  streaked  emission  spectroscopy  89.  In these experiments optical emission from 
shocked  and  detonating  thin  film  explosive 
samples is analyzed by passing light sequentially 
through  a  spectrometer  and  streak  camera 
wavelength vs. time of the emitted light. Thin 
film  samples  are  used  to  aid  in  observation  of 
obscured  in  larger  reacting  samples.      In  our 
spectrograms  we  are  able  to  identify  several 
reactive intermediate species and the contours of 
the  emission  bands  provides  information  about 
the  initial  quantum  state  distribution  of  the 
molecules  which  may  assist  in  understanding 
the underlying initiation mechanism.   
intermediate  species 
In  our  experiments  light  emitted  from 
shocked  and  detonating  samples  is  analyzed 
sequentially  by  a  spectrometer  and  streak 
spectrogram of the emitted light wavelength vs. 
time.  A schematic of the experiment is shown 
in Figure 1 and examples of thin film explosive 
samples are shown in Figure 2.  All samples are 
prepared  by  vapor  deposition  using 
techniques described in 10. 
Figure  1.  a  Collection  geometry  used  in 
detonating  film  shots.    An  explosive  film  is 
initiated at one end  emitted light is collected by 
a  fiber  optic  probe  as  the  detonation  front 
traverses the film.  b Collection geometry used 
in  flyer  impact  shots.    An  exploding  foil  not 
shown launches a parylene flyer which impacts 
the  sample.    c  Emission  from  the  shocked 
sample is collected by a fiber and sent to a streak 
spectrometer for analysis. 
Figure 2.  Thin film explosive samples.  a Thin 
film  of hexanitroazobenzene  HNAB deposited 
on  a  polycarbonate  substrate.    Samples  of  this 
type are used in detonation shots described in the 
text.    b  Thin  film  of  hexanitrostilbene  HNS 
Samples of this type are used in the flyer impact 
shots  described  in  the  text.    c  Molecular 
structure  of  HNAB.    d  Molecular  structure  of 
Two  sample  configurations  are  used  in  the 
experiments.  In the first configuration Fig. 1a 
a  linear  strip  of  hexanitroazobenzene  HNAB 
vapor-deposited on a polycarbonate substrate is 
initiated on one end by a parylene flyer launched 
by an exploding foil that is driven by a capacitive 
discharge unit.  The impact of the flyer initiates a 
detonation  wave  at  one  end  of  the  film  which 
propagates  toward  the  opposite  end. 
detonation  front  passes  a  1  mm  diameter  silica 
fiber Polymicro and light collected by the fiber 
is sent to the streak spectrometer for analysis.  In 
the second configuration Fig. 1b a thin film of 
hexanitrostilbene  HNS  vapor-deposited  on  a 
lithium  fluoride  substrate  is  shocked  by  a 
parylene  flyer  launched  by  an  exploding  foil.  
The  impact  of  the  flyer  velocity  3700  ms 
shocks the sample to a pressure of approximately 
14.5  GPa.    Light  emitted  from  the  shocked 
sample  is  collected  by  the  fiber.    This  second 
geometry  is  intended  to  allow  samples  to  be 
shocked  at  various  pressures  near  the  initiation 
threshold of the material.  In this configuration 
the velocity of the flyer and its time of impact on 
the  sample  are  both  measured  using  photonic 
Doppler velocimetry. 
Emitted  light  is  analyzed  by  passing  the 
Princeton Instruments SP300i equipped with a 
300  linesmm  diffraction  grating  and  then  to  a 
streak camera Hamamatsu C7700-01 set to a 1s sweep time.  The spectrometerstreak camera 
combination  provides  an  overall  resolution  of 
0.6  nm  per  pixel.    The  streak  spectrometry 
apparatus  is  calibrated  using  a  mercury-argon 
lamp with the DAAAC software package Voss 
Scientific.    The  data  is  corrected  for  both  the 
nonlinear  wavelength  dispersion  and  nonlinear 
spectral intensity response of the system.   
A  streak  spectrum  of  ultraviolet  emission 
from a detonating HNAB film is shown in Figure 
3.  This  spectrum  is  recorded  using  the  sample 
geometry  shown  in  Figure  1a.    Figure  3a 
shows  the  two-dimensional  streak  spectrogram 
and  Figure  3b  shows 
spectrum.  The intensity of the emission is nearly 
uniform  in  time  as  the  detonation  wave  passes 
past  the  face  of  the  fiber  and  contains  distinct 
atomic and molecular emission features.  Atomic 
emission  lines  from  both  aluminum  Al  3s23p 
32  -  3s24s  2S  and 
12  -  3s24s  2S  Al  3s23p  2Po
calcium atoms Ca 3p64s  2S  3p64p  2Po
12  are  observed  in  the 
3p64s  2S    3p64p  2Po
spectrum  between  393    397  nm. 
emission  lines  are  unrelated  to  the  explosive 
material  and  likely  arise  due  to  photoexcitation 
of  impurity  atoms  in  the  substrate  andor  fiber.   
A blue-shaded band with an apparent band head 
at  388  nm  is  also  observed  from  intermediates 
produced in the detonation process and consists 
of overlapping contributions from the C2 C1g - 
A1u and CN B2 - X2 systems both of which 
appear as blue-shaded bands with band heads at 
385  and  388  nm  respectively.    Figure  3b 
shows  the  result  of  a  spectral  simulation  using 
the spectral simulation software PGOPHER 11 
and  molecular  constants 
  The  simulations  assume 
equilibrium thermal distributions in all quantum 
states  and  temperatures  of  5000K  for  C2  and 
6500K for CN.  These temperatures were chosen 
to produce reasonable accord with the observed 
spectrum  and  allow  definite  assignment  of 
emitting  species  but  are  not 
quantitatively  reflect  the  actual  quantum  state 
distributions  of  the  emitting  molecules.    The 
chemical  mechanism  by  which  the  species  are 
produced may not be a thermal process i.e. may 
result  in  athermal  population  distributions  and 
the  emitting  molecules  may  experience  a  range 
of  temperature  and  pressure  conditions  in  the 
detonating thin film sample.  
Figure  4  shows  a  streak  spectrogram  of 
visible emission from an identical HNAB sample 
in the 520-680 nm range.  Figure 4a shows the 
streak  spectrogram  and  Figure  4b  shows  the 
spectrum  consists  of  a  broad  feature  with  peak 
emission at approximately 640 nm.  This feature 
is clearly molecular in origin its intensity profile 
incandescence a blackbody spectrum at 4500K 
with  peak  emission  at  640  nm  is  shown  in 
Figure  4b  red  trace.  The  emission  must  also 
be  produced  by  a  triatomic  or  larger  molecule 
the intensity profile does not match the emission 
spectrum of any diatomic molecule consisting of 
of  C  H  N  or  O  atoms  all  of  which  are  wellknown.  The relatively long wavelength range of 
the emitted light indicates that the source of the 
emission is likely a free radical with at least one 
loosely-bound optically-active unpaired electron.   
Figure 3.  Ultraviolet emission from detonating 
HNAB.    a  Streak  spectrogram.    b  Timeintegrated  emission  spectrum  Experiment 
and  simulated  spectrum 
overlapping C2 C1g - A1u and CN B2 - X2 
A likely candidate for the source of this emission 
signal is NO2 whose emission spectrum matches 
the  spectrum  observed  here  and  which  is 
predicted  to  be  produced  early  in  the  initiation 
process  according  to  some  quantum-mechanical 
theories  of  initiation  5-7  as  well  as  molecular 
dynamics  simulations  13-15  of  initiation  in 
HNS  and  similar  explosive  materials.    The 
intensity  profile  of 
the  emission  spectrum  of 
electronically  excited  NO2  from  its  2B2  state.    
The absorption and emission spectra of NO2 are 
both  quasicontinuous  appearing  as  a  broad 
continuous  band  with  weaker  superimposed 
the  observed  band 
structure  16.    The  spectrum  of  NO2  is  quite 
complex  owing  to  extensive  vibronic  mixing 
between  high  vibrational  levels  of  the  X2A1 
ground state with lower vibrational levels of the 
2B2  excited  state  17.    The  absorption  cross 
section  from  the  ground  X2A1  state  increases 
steadily toward the blue from 650 nm to 390 
nm  where  dissociation  to  NO    O  becomes 
energetically  possible  by  one-photon  aborption 
and  continues  further  into  the  ultraviolet.    The 
emission  spectrum  from  the  2B2  state  by 
contrast  begins  at  390  nm  below  which 
dissociation is no longer possible and increases 
in intensity toward longer wavelengths reaching 
intensity  between  500  and  700  nm 
depending  on  which  vibrational  levels  of  the 
2B2  state  the  molecule  is  radiating  from  and 
decreasing  in  intensity  thereafter.    A  dispersed 
fluorescence  spectrum  of  electronically  excited 
NO2  recorded  by  Butler  et  al.  18  following 
photolysis  of  nitromethane  is  superimposed  on 
Figure  4b  labeled  NO2  Fluorescence.  This 
spectrum  is  remarkably  consistent  with  the 
spectrum  observed  in  our  experiment  both 
spectra  peak  at  approximately  640  nm  and 
display  similar  contours. 
  Variation  in  the 
quantum  state  distribution  of  the  upper  state 
could easily account for the differences between 
the two spectra.  The emission spectrum of NO2 
produced  by  photolysis  of  N2O4  19  and 
chemiluminescence of NO2 from reaction of NO 
  O  20  are  both  quite  similar.    We  thus 
tentatively  assign 
electronically excited NO2. 
the  emission  as  due 
To  achieve  better  temporal  resolution 
and  greater  control  of  the  shock  conditions  we 
developed  the  experimental  platform  shown 
in  Figure  1b  and  recorded 
emission spectra of samples using this geometry. 
Figure  5  shows  streak  spectrograms  of  shocked 
HNS  samples  in  the  380-540  nm  range  Figure 
5a  and  the  520-680  nm  range  Figure  5b.    In 
these experiments the flyer 50 m parylene is 
launched  at  a  velocity  of  3700  ms  impacting 
the  sample  and  launching  a  14.5  GPa  shock.  
Impact  occurs  at  300  ns 
spectrograms  shown  in  Figure  5  as  determined 
by  PDV  measurements  of  flyer  impacts  of  LiF 
windows with identical configuration.  Emission 
begins  when  the  flyer  impacts  the  explosive 
sample.  The time of impact is indicated by the 
white  arrows  at  300  ns  on  both  streak 
spectrograms.    Following  impact  the  sample 
emits  radiation  most  strongly  from  500  nm  to 
680  nm  with  peak  intensity  at  approximately 
Figure  4.    Visible  emission  from  detonating 
HNAB.   a  Streaked  spectrum.    b  Timeintegrated 
Experiment  4500K  blackbody  emission 
spectrum  labeled  Blackbody  and  dispersed 
fluorescence  spectrum  of  electronically  excited 
labeled  NO2  Fluorescence 
from Butler et al. 18.  The emission feature is 
electronically excited NO2 see text for details. 
At  approximately  500  ns  additional  features 
unrelated  to  the  explosive  appear  including 
transmission  of  broadband  radiation  from  the 
electrical  discharge  of  the  foil.    The  onset  of 
these  features  is  indicated  by  the  upper  white 
arrows  in  Figure  5.   The  integrated  emission 
spectrum  between  300-500  ns  where 
explosive  is  reacting  and  emits  light  without 
complication from the later  processes is shown 
in  Figure  5c.    This  spectrum  is  similar  to  the 
spectrum of HNAB shown in Figure 4b with a 
similar  intensity  and  similar  peak  emission 
wavelength.    Following  the  discussion  above 
and noting the similarity in structure between the 
HNS  and  HNAB  molecules  we  tentatively 
assign the emission to NO2 following the same 
arguments as above.   
The  apparent  observation  of  NO2  in  the 
HNS  experiments  which  are  more  controlled 
than  the  HNAB  detonation  shots  described 
above  and  absence  of  emission  from  other 
intermediate  species  such  as  C2  and  CN  as 
observed  in  detonating  HNAB  is  consistent 
with  production  of  NO2  in  the  early  stages  of 
the  onset  of  exothermic 
secondary reactions.  It is interesting to compare 
the  results  we  present  here  with  the  results  of 
Dreger  et  al.  8  who  performed  similar 
experiments on single crystals of PETN.  Dreger 
et al. also observed broad spectroscopic features 
that  appear  200  ns  after  impact  and  whose 
intensities  vary  with  time.    They  attribute  the 
to  an  optically-dark 
induction  step  production  of  NO3
of the C-O bond followed by reaction of NO3
with  unreacted  PETN  molecules  to  produce 
.  Although the emission spectrum of NO2
has  not  been  observed  in  the  laboratory  the 
molecule  is  known  to  have  electronic  states 
in  energy  approximately 
coincide  with  the  two  broad  emission  bands 
observed  in  their  experiments.    Although  the 
broad  spectroscopic  features  we  observe  in  our 
experiments  on  both  HNS  and  HNAB  are 
qualitatively similar to one of the bands observed 
by  Dreger  et  al.  their  lower-energy  band 
centered  at  600  nm  it  appears  unlikely  that 
 is the source of emission in our spectra.   In 
fluorescence  with  no  induction  step  and  only 
one emission band.  The induction step observed 
in  PETN  which  Dreger  et  al.  attribute  to 
-  ions  is  not  possible  by  any 
single-step reaction in HNS or HNAB due to the 
absence  of  O-NO2  bonds.    Direct  formation  of 
  by  cleavage  of  C-NO2  bonds  is  far  less 
energetically  favorable  than  direct  formation  of 
NO2  and  the  spectrum  we  observe  is  more 
consistent  with  the  electronic  structure  of  NO2 
shocked  HNS  and  HNAB. 
Future  experiments  will  be  performed  to 
confirm  or  deny  the  assignment  of  NO2  as  the 
emitting  species  observed  in  the  visible  spectra 
experiments  are  expected  to  be  useful  in  this 
regard.    The  contour  of  the  observed  emission 
band  also  provides  useful 
population  distribution  of 
Dispersed  fluorescence  spectra  performed  by 
resolving  fluorescence  from  selected  levels  of 
the 2B2 state of NO2 will aid this effort.  Streak 
spectroscopy shots of HNS and HNAB will also 
be performed at higher temporal resolution in the 
visible  and  in  the  ultraviolet  range  200    300 
We  have  recorded  time-  and  wavelengthresolve  emission  spectra  of  shocked  and 
detonating  explosive 
emission from several intermediate species have 
been  observed  including  C2  CN  and  possibly 
NO2.    The  potential  observation  of  NO2  is 
important as NO2 is predicted to be among the 
intermediates  produced  during  shock 
initiation.    Further  experiments  are  needed  to 
confirm  the  assignment  of  NO2  as  the  emitting 
  If  confirmed  the  contour  of  the 
observed  emission  bands  could  provide  useful 
information  about  the  initial  quantum  state 
distribution of the NO2 molecules and therefore 
information  regarding  the  mechanism  of  their Development of the High Explosive Survivability Test 
John Henry G. Williams 
Air Force Research Laboratory Munitions Directorate 
Eglin Air Force Base FL 32547 
Abstract.  The  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory  Munitions  Directorate  has  developed  a 
sub-scale  test  aimed  to  quantitatively  compare  the  reaction  threshold  of  different 
explosive  fills  during  low  pressure  500  MPa  long  duration  milliseconds  loading 
events. In terms of this effort the reaction threshold is defined as the point at which a 
burn  or  deflagration  reaction  occurs.  During  the  initial  development  effort  several  test 
designs  were  proposed  and  a  design  was  down-selected  by  comparing  the  test 
environment of each potential system with a standard set of parameters. These included 
pressure  in  the  fill  duration  of  that  pressure  and  the  relative  velocity  of  the  explosive 
sample sliding within its container. The outcome of this effort was the High Explosive 
Survivability  Test  HEST.  Overall  the  High  Explosive  Survivability  Test  offers  a 
unique  simple  safe  and  robust  approach  to  quantitatively  measure  the  explosives 
reaction threshold with respect to long duration low pressure events. 
low  pressure    500  MPa              
is  an  ever-increasing  need 
understand  the  reaction  threshold  of  energetic 
72 ksi long duration ms events. Because of 
this  it  is  highly  desirable  to  have  a  test  to 
quantitatively  determine  an  explosives  ability  to 
survive  such  events  in  order  to  aid  in  future 
formulation  development.  It  is  important  to  note 
that the threshold referred to is the point at which a 
burn  or  deflagration  reaction  occurs 
material  and  is  not  intended  to  be  a  detonation 
Current  methods  for  obtaining  reaction 
threshold information include the Expanded Large 
Scale Gap Test ELSGT 1 the Intense Pressure 
and Friction Test IPFT previously developed at 
the  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory  Energetic 
Materials  Branch  2  and  full-scale  munition 
little  data  analysis 
testing. The ELSGT is the current testing standard 
and has several advantages. Namely it is  easy to 
operate  it  provides  a  quantitative  measure  of 
explosive  sensitivity  based  on  a  single  variable 
thickness of a polymethyl-methacrylate PMMA 
submitted to is not closely aligned with that of the 
desired  environment.  While  the  required  duration 
is on the order of milliseconds the shock induced 
microseconds three orders of magnitude too short. 
Additionally while the pressures required are less 
than  500  MPa  the  ELSGT  input  pressures  are 
closer to 5000 MPa 725 ksi.  
The IPFT attempted to solve these issues 
by creating a test that aimed to more closely mimic 
the  desired  environment.  However  the  test  was 
plagued  with  repeatability 
provide  a  quantitative  comparison  between  the 
Distribution A. Approved for Public Release. Distribution Unlimited 96TW-2014-0033. 
thresholds of different fills and still struggled with 
the  long durations  required  to  successfully  model 
the  target  environment.  As  such  it  has  largely 
been  discarded  as  a  viable  option  for  testing. 
Finally  there  is  the  option  of  full-scale  testing. 
While this option provides the advantage of testing 
in  a  near-operational 
environment  it  is  prohibitively  expensive  in 
terms of both funding and scheduling constraints 
to  use  as  a  formulation  screening  tool.  As  such 
AFRLRWME conducted an effort to create a new 
sub-scale test designed to fill the gap. A summary 
of the currently available testing enumerated above 
is provided in Table 1. 
Table 1. Current testing options 
Testing Constraints and Objectives 
While the main objective of the final test 
design  was  to  properly  mimic  the  conditions 
desired  several  design  constraints  were  imposed 
on  the  development  of  the  new  test.  This  helped 
ensure  the  test  was  best  able  to  fulfill  the 
requirements  of  a  developmental  formulation 
effort.  The  main  logistical  constraint  was  the 
ability  to  conduct  the  test  using  local  AFRL 
facilities. This helped the test to be cost effective 
and  to  reduce  the  amount  of  time  required  to 
schedule  a  test  series.  In  balance  with  that 
however  there  was  a  desire  to  keep  the  sample 
size as large as possible to most effectively mimic 
the  conditions  seen  with  a  full-scale 
Furthermore  it  was  desirable  to  have  a  test  that 
could be run several times a day again allowing it 
to  be  used  as  a  formulation  screening  tool  for 
experiment  for  finalized  formulations.  It  is  worth 
noting  that  all  of  these  constraints  are  designed 
with the intent to help insert the new test as early 
the  formulation  development 
process.  By  doing  this  the  test  will  open  new 
for  material  development 
the  need  of  prohibitively  expensive 
In  terms  of  testing  capabilities  it  was 
test  provide  a  quantitative 
that  allowed  direct  comparison 
between materials and that the device was able to 
test  materials  to  failure  another  shortcoming  of 
the  IPFT  thus  giving  insight  into  the  margin  of 
survivability  for  a  given  material  at  a  given 
condition.  The  concept  of  margin  will  allow 
formulators to determine whether current materials 
meet a given set of future requirements or if a new 
development  effort  is  required.  Finally  it  was 
desirable  to  construct  a  test  that  used  a  GONOGO threshold metric similar to the ELSGT also 
aiding  in  its  use  as  a  screening  option  by 
diagnostics. However it was also necessary for the 
test to be easily modifiable to allow for additional 
diagnostics  in  later  test  iterations  if  desired. 
Examples  of  these  modifications  are  presented 
later in the text.      
In  order  to  ensure  the  development  of  a 
meaningful  test  capability  two  measures  were 
taken. First a list of required test parameters was 
developed  to  include  pressure  seen  in  the  fill 
duration  of  that  pressure  relative  velocity  of  the 
explosive  sliding  within  its  container  and  an 
independently  validated  parameter  developed  by 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory LLNL 
termed the ignition parameter 3.  
Following  metric  determination  a  group 
of  subject  matter  experts 
Department of Defense and Department of Energy 
was  assembled  to  create  a  list  of  potential  test 
designs  compare  their  explosive  environments 
with  that  of  the  desired  parameters  and  downselect  the  most  representative  test  option.  Four 
viable test options were identified for comparison. 
They  were  the  Steven  test  a  currently  available 
capability  conducted  at  LLNL  that  involves  a 
projectile striking a disc of material the combined 
pressure  and  shear  test  a  test  designed  with  a 
piston and a tapered sleeve to impart two loading 
conditions simultaneously the shear punch test a 
modification  to  the  split-Hopkinson  pressure  bar 
Distribution A. Approved for Public Release. Distribution Unlimited 96TW-2014-0033. 
and  the  sliding  friction  test  a  test  that  involved 
preloading a sample in compression and sliding a 
sleeve  along  the  material  again  imparting  two 
loading mechanisms. Potential test geometries can 
be seen in Figure 1.  
bring  the  conditions  seen  during  HEST  testing 
more  in  line  with  the  required  metrics  with  a 
particular emphasis on increasing the duration. It is 
of interest to note that extending the sample length 
had  a  significant  impact  towards  increasing  the 
duration.  By  conducting  the  optimization  study 
the  duration  of  the  test  event  rose  into  the 
millisecond range thus satisfying the requirement 
to  be  on  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  the 
desired  duration  metric.  Additionally 
pressures  were  well  within  the  desired  range. 
ignition  parameter 
stayed  higher  than  desired.  This  was  less  of  a 
concern however as it was believed this could be 
easily  mitigated  with  the  use  of  mock  explosive 
pads  and  elimination  of  pinch  points  during 
HEST Development and Fabrication 
portion  of  the  HEST  effort  was  split  into  three 
phases.  First  the  finalized  design  and  fabrication 
of  the  HEST  apparatus  itself  second  the  design 
and construction of a device to input the required 
load on the explosive sample and third the design 
and  construction  of  a  support  structure 
incorporate  the  outcome  of  phases  one  and  two. 
Each of these phases is described in detail below. 
The  final  design  for  the  High  Explosive 
Survivability Test apparatus can be seen in Figure 
3.  General  operation  of  the  HEST  apparatus 
required  the  impactor  and  drive  piston  to  be 
imparted with an initial velocity. These parts start 
in  contact  but  are  not  connected.  This  results  in 
the  drive  piston  putting 
compression  while  the  impactor  simultaneously 
drives  the  outer  sleeve  which  imparts  a  shear 
component  on  the  sample.  The  sample  is  a  right 
circular  cylinder  with  a  5.08  cm  2  in.  diameter 
and 19.69 cm 7.75 in. in length.  It is important 
to  note  that  the  explosive  sample  is  cast  directly 
inside  the  outer  sleeve  leading  to  good  adhesion 
between  the  sleeve  wall  and  the  fill  and  a 
coefficient of friction on the order of 0.4 4. The 
outer  sleeve  then  continues  to  slide  along  the 
standoff  piston  is  slowed  considerably  by  a 
Fig. 1. Potential test designs 
It  was  determined  that  the  friction  slide 
test  best  matched  the  parameters  required  and 
would be taken forward. Once selected the friction 
the  High  Explosive 
Survivability Test HEST. 
HEST Design Modifications 
Two  initial  modifications  were  made  to 
the  HEST  design.  The  modifications  can  be  seen 
in  Figure  2  and  included  changing  the  static 
preload  to  a  dynamic  compression  event  and 
adding  a  hemispherical  cap  to  the  explosive 
sample.  These  were  added 
manufacturing process for the test and to increase 
the duration of the loading event respectively. 
Fig. 2. Initial modifications to HEST scale in cm 
initial  HEST  design  was 
solidified  a  systematic  design  of  experiments 
based exploration of the different test dimensions 
was conducted. The goal of this evaluation was to 
Distribution A. Approved for Public Release. Distribution Unlimited 96TW-2014-0033. 
Fig. 3. HEST Apparatus
section  of  rigid  foam  and  then  comes  to  rest 
against the backstop. The foam was added to keep 
the  sleeve  from  impacting  the  backstop  at  high 
speeds  potentially  causing  the  sleeve  to  rebound 
and slide over the explosive sample a second time 
leading  to  unnecessary  pinch  points  possible 
reaction and the destruction of equipment.  
Aside  from  the  addition  of  the  foam 
several  other  key  differences  exist  between  the 
final apparatus and what was compiled during the 
design work seen when comparing Figures 2 and 
3.  First  the  drive  piston  was  combined  with  the 
flyer to make one piece. This is a consequence of 
simplifying the setup by using a separate striker to 
impart  the  energy  into  the  impactordrive  piston 
rather  than  accelerating  the  impactordrive  piston 
themselves.  Secondly  the  standoff  piston  was 
extended  and  hollowed  out.  Lengthening  the 
piston  allowed  more  time  for  the  outer  sleeve  to 
come to rest thus reducing the chance of rebound. 
Hollowing  out  the  piston  allowed  for  a  pressure 
transducer  to  be  inserted  which  measured  the 
pressure  seen  in  the  explosive  fill  during  each 
testing event. Finally in addition to the rear pad a 
mock explosive pad was added to the front of the 
explosive  sample.  This  was  in  attempt  to  reduce 
the  ignition  parameter  as  well  as  eliminate  pinch 
points that could potentially cause a false reaction. 
apparatus  can  be  seen  in  Table  2.  Lastly  it  is 
important  to  note  that  the  pieces  of  the  HEST 
apparatus  with  the  exception  of  the  pressure 
transducer are intended to be disposable. 
Table 2. HEST apparatus facts 
Operational Velocity 
5-100 ms 16-330 fps 
18.2 kg 40 lb Striker 
In  order  to  operate  the  HEST  apparatus 
effectively  a  device  was  required  to  impart  the 
mechanisms were considered to include a powder 
gun a gas gun and spring driven impactor. In the 
end  a  nitrogen  powered  gas  gun  system  was 
chosen  for  several  reasons  it  was  simple  to 
operate would not require extensive cleaning and 
reloading after each shot and if designed correctly 
would  be  easily  able  to  extend  beyond  the 
velocities  required  in  this  application  should  the 
need  arise.  An  image  of the final  gun design  can 
be seen in Figure 4. As is apparent in the image 
the barrel of the gun is angled with respect to the 
breech.  The  angle  serves  two  purposes.  First  it 
simplifies  the  loading  process  by  allowing  the 
projectile to be loaded from the breech end of the 
gun. Second as the gun projectile never leaves the 
barrel  of  the  gun  the  HEST  apparatus  sits  flush 
with the muzzle break in the unlikely event that a 
reaction propelled the striker back down the barrel 
this  would  allow  the  striker  to  exit  the  barrel 
through  an  aluminum  breakaway  window  not 
shown and not destroy the inner workings of the 
gun. Additional information regarding the gun can 
be seen in Table 3. 
Fig. 4. HEST gas gun 
Distribution A. Approved for Public Release. Distribution Unlimited 96TW-2014-0033. 
Table 3. HEST gas gun facts 
Operational Pressure  Up to 13.8 MPa 2 ksi  
A cutaway of the gun breech can be seen 
in Figure 5. The gun is operated based on a shuttle 
valve system. As the nitrogen gas begins to fill the 
breech  through  section  A  it  pushes  the  shuttle 
valve  forward  effectively  sealing  the  gun  barrel. 
When  then  gun  is  fired  the  gas  in  section  A  is 
evacuated  leading  to  a  pressure  differential  that 
causes  the  gas  in  section  B  to  push  the  shuttle 
valve backwards opening the barrel to the flow of 
gas  and  firing  the  gun.  This  mechanism  was 
chosen  as  it  is  simple  having  only  one  moving 
part and does not require the use of burst plates or 
other disposable media. 
Fig. 5. HEST gas gun breech cutaway 
HEST Support Structure 
The final phase of the development effort 
involved the construction of a mounting structure 
to  tie  the  gas  gun  and  HEST  apparatus  together. 
An exploded view of the structure can be seen in 
Figure  6.  The  structure  consisted  of  two  I-beams 
with a series of support brackets and barrel rings to 
support  and  contain  the  HEST  gas  gun.  The 
support  structure  also  provided  a  mechanism  to 
absorb the recoil of the gun upon firing. The HEST 
apparatus  itself  sits  on  the  dark  grey  holder  and 
inside the teal carrying cage seen on the far left of 
Figure 6. The carrying cage is designed to contain 
the  apparatus  during  testing  and  allow  for  easy 
removal  of  the  sample  post  testing.  Additional 
information on the support structure can be seen in 
Fig. 6. HEST support structure  
Table 4. HEST support structure facts 
The  final  HEST  system  can  be  seen  in 
Figure 7. The gas gun and support structure were 
permanently  mounted  onto  a  trailer  to  allow  for 
easy  transport  around  the  test  range  and  for  the 
gun  to  be  quickly  moved  in  and  out  of  storage. 
Also the trailer was equipped with jacks at its four 
corners to allow for simplified leveling of the gun 
during  testing.  Additional  information  regarding 
the final system can be seen in Table 5. 
Fig. 7. Overall HEST system 
Distribution A. Approved for Public Release. Distribution Unlimited 96TW-2014-0033. 
Table 5. HEST system facts 
Initial HEST Testing 
HEST testing was conducted at the AFRL 
Damage Mechanisms Branchs test range inside a 
previously constructed concrete enclosure seen in 
Figure 8. Originally the structure was enclosed on 
all but one side with one side not pictured able 
to slide open and closed with the use of a forklift. 
The  structure  was  modified  to  fully  enclose  the 
area with  a  three  inch  thick armor  wall  covering 
the final unenclosed side. Care was taken to allow 
space  between  the  armor  wall  and  the  concrete 
structure  for  cabling  and  tubing  to  be  run  inside 
the enclosure. The HEST gun was oriented down 
range towards the sliding concrete wall and away 
from  the  armor.  Having  the  item  fully  enclosed 
during testing allowed for a large reduction in the 
required  evacuation  area  should  a  reaction  occur 
that  shut  down  the  range  facility.  The  ability  to 
slide the concrete wall open and closed allowed for 
easy  access  for  munitions  handlers  and  test 
engineers to set up the test item at the beginning of 
each shot and remove the item after each shot.   
Fig. 8. HEST gun enclosure 
A  schematic  of  the  test  setup  inside  the 
enclosure  can  be  seen  in  Figure  9.  The  HEST 
trailer  was  first  maneuvered  into  the  enclosure 
with  the  barrel  pointing  down  range.  Care  was 
taken to position the gun off-center inside the area. 
This allowed for the use of a reflecting mirror to 
obtain  high-speed  video  of  the  test  event.  As 
mentioned earlier the gap between the armor wall 
and  the  concrete  structure  was  used  to  run  the 
cabling and nitrogen tubing that operate the gun. A 
Phantom  camera  used  for  obtaining  high-speed 
video  was  mounted  outside  the  enclosure  and 
protected  via  a  window.  Finally  a  fiducial  board 
was set up behind the charge to create a point of 
reference for the video obtained during testing.   
Fig. 9. HEST setup   
As  mentioned  previously 
diagnostic  for  the  HEST  was  designed  to  be  a 
GONO-GO determination. This was aided by the 
use  of  a  Phantom  high-speed  camera  which 
allowed  for  observation  of  the  samples  during 
determination  the  high-speed  video  of  each  shot 
was  used  to  determine  the  velocity  of  the  outer 
sleeve separating from the explosive charge with 
the aid of the fiducial board and also served as a 
troubleshooting tool to ensure proper alignment of 
the apparatus throughout the event.  
In  addition  to  the  high-speed  video  two 
diagnostics were added to the HEST setup. First a 
pressure transducer was put in place to monitor the 
pressure  in  the  fill  during  the  loading  event.  The 
transducer  was  installed  with  a  specialized  tool 
and was offset from the charge by a small column 
of vacuum grease. This allowed the pressure to be 
Distribution A. Approved for Public Release. Distribution Unlimited 96TW-2014-0033. 
Additionally  it  is  important  to  note  that  the 
portion  of  the charge  against  the  column  was  the 
inert  mock  material.  This  ensured 
transducer  never  came 
material and would be able to be removed posttest 
and  reused  without  the  possibility  of  explosive 
material  being  caught  between  the  threads  of  the 
The second added diagnostic was a fiberoptic  system  designed  to  measure  the  velocity  of 
the gun projectile as it passed through the muzzle 
break.  The  system  operated  with  a  series  of  two 
photo  gates  mounted  in  the  holes  of  the  muzzle 
break. The gates mark the time as the leading edge 
of  the  striker  breaks  the  gate  allowing  for  high 
precision velocity determinations. The diagnostics 
described in this section can be seen in Figures 10 
Fig. 10. High-speed video  
Fig. 12. Axially-mounted pressure transducer 
Safety Considerations 
As  with  any  explosive  operation  safety 
was  a  major  consideration  when  designing  the 
operation of the gas gun and the steps involved in 
testing  as  a  whole.  As  such  the  system  was 
remotely operated via a set of four solenoids. One 
solenoid controlled the flow of nitrogen gas from 
controlled the flow of nitrogen from the line into 
the breech a third controlled the firing mechanism 
of  the  gun  and  the  fourth  controlled  an  empty 
valve  that  allowed  for  discharging  of  the  breech 
without  firing  the  gun.  This  allowed  for  safe 
disarming of the gun at any point in the operation 
up  to  the  point  of  fire.  In  order  to  guard  against 
accidental charging and firing of the gun all of the 
solenoids  were  locked-out  of  operation  via  a  key 
that  was  controlled  by  munitions  handlers  at  all 
times.  In  addition  to  the  solenoids  there  were 
digital  pressure  monitors  on  the  breech  and  the 
nitrogen line. This allowed test engineers to assure 
that  both  the  breech  and  line  were  empty  before 
personnel returned the test area. Furthermore there 
was an additional analog pressure gauge mounted 
on  the  breech  to  serve  as  a  backup  to  the  digital 
sensors. This gauge was monitored via video feed 
during  testing.  In  addition  a  carrying  cage  was 
constructed  to  allow  for  munitions  handlers  to 
safely  move  the  HEST  apparatus  and  explosive 
charge  to  a  predetermined  site  for  destruction. 
Images  of  the  enumerated  safety  considerations 
can be seen in Figures 13 14 and 15. The carrying 
cage can be seen previously in Figures 6 and 7. 
Fig. 11. Fiber-optic photo gates 
Distribution A. Approved for Public Release. Distribution Unlimited 96TW-2014-0033. 
Fig. 13. HEST charge and empty solenoids  
Fig. 14. HEST fire solenoid 
assembly  of  the  HEST  apparatus  per  Figure  3. 
Before  the  standoff  piston  was  inserted  the 
pressure  transducer  was  installed  as  can  be  seen 
by the green cable in Figure 16. Additionally precut pieces 929 cm2 1 ft2 of foam were layered 
to  fill  the  space  between  the  end  of  the  HEST 
carrying  cage and  the backstop  and  to  aid  in  the 
slowdown  of  the  outer  sleeve.  In  order  to  ensure 
the backstop disc was at the proper height it was 
set  on  a  piece  of  a  4  by  4  wood  block.  The 
apparatus  was  set  up 
to  have  both  pistons 
drivestandoff and test material in contact and to 
have  a  0.64  cm  0.25  in  gap  between  the  two 
sleeves  impactorouter  sleeve.  Upon  proper 
setup the apparatus ran from the end of the guns 
muzzle break to the angled backstop at the end of 
the  setup.  A  small  I-beam  was  wedged  between 
the  end  of  the  support  structure  and  the  sliding 
concrete  wall.  This  allowed  for  the  load  to  be 
transferred into the essentially rigid concrete wall 
upon  impact  and  not  have  to  be  handled  by  the 
apparatus.  Finally  the  top  of  the  HEST  carrying 
cage  was  secured  over  the  apparatus  as  seen  in 
Figure  16.  This  helped  to  ensure  the  HEST 
apparatus  would  stay  aligned  during  testing  and 
also  allowed  for  a  simple  way  for  munitions 
the  damaged  explosive 
material  from  the  site  for  destruction  without 
damaging the gun and trailer. 
Figure 16. HEST Pretest Setup 
Once  the  item  was  fully  assembled  and 
ready  for  the  shot  munitions  handlers  turned  on 
the  nitrogen  bottle  with  the  regulator  set  to         
Fig. 15. HEST fire control box  
The final pretest HEST setup can be seen 
in Figure 16. Test buildup began with the chargefilled  outer  sleeve.  The  remaining  pistons  and 
sleeves  were  then  put  in  place  to  complete 
Distribution A. Approved for Public Release. Distribution Unlimited 96TW-2014-0033. 
6.9 MPa 1000 psi and took cover in the control 
room  with  the  rest  of  the  test  personnel.  It  is 
important  to  note  that  due  to  the  nitrogen  and 
charge  solenoids  the  line  did  not  fill  and  the 
breech did not charge upon turning on the nitrogen 
bottle.  Once  the  munitions  handlers  were  under 
cover  they  relinquished  the  lock-out  key  to  the 
range  engineer  that  handled  gun  operation.  The 
nitrogen  solenoid  was  then  turned  on  to  fill  the 
nitrogen  line.  The  charge  solenoid  was  then 
opened to allow for the breech to fill. The breech 
was then allowed to pressurize to a value slightly 
higher  than  desired  fire  pressure  and  the  charge 
and  nitrogen  solenoids  were  turned  off.  As  the 
breech slowly lost pressure an intentional design 
feature  designed  in  the  event  of  a power  failure 
the  gun  was  fired  as  it  reached  the  desired 
operational  pressure.  After  the  shot  the  fire 
solenoid  was  closed  and  the  charge  and  empty 
solenoids  were  opened  to  allow  for  complete 
venting of the breech and nitrogen line.  
An image of the HEST setup posttest can 
be seen in Figure 17. In the image the outer sleeve 
that once contained the test charge has ejected the 
charge slid along the standoff piston into the rigid 
foam and come to rest against the backstop. The 
charge was fully ejected and both mock explosive 
pads  can  be  seen  on  either  side  of  the  material. 
it  allowed  for  an 
unconfined charge posttest which greatly reduced 
some  of  the  safety  concerns  associated  with  live 
is  advantageous  as 
Figure 17. HEST Posttest Setup 
Currently HEST testing has only looked 
at  inert  materials.  These  initial  inert  tests  were 
designed to help validate the test design calibrate 
the  charge  pressure  in  the  breech  to  final  striker 
velocity and to ensure proper test operation. The 
calibration curve generated can be seen in Figure 
18.  A  series  of  eight  shots  was  conducted  two 
each  at  four  different  pressures  to  develop  the 
curve. Overall the operation of the system is quite 
repeatable with velocity pairs at all pressures but 
the  lowest  within  2  of  each  other.  The  shots 
conducted  at  0.7  MPa  100 psi  were  within  4 
this  larger  difference  is  attributed  to  frictional 
considerations  that  are  more  relevant  at  lower 
Fig. 18. HEST velocity calibration curve 
 Furthermore  the  inert  charges  while 
normally blue in color were cast with a light red 
dye.  This  allowed  for  delineation  between  the 
mock pads which would be inert even during live 
testing and the inert main charge which would be 
live during live testing and helped to verify that 
no  live  material  would  be  pinched  between  the 
sliding  pistons  during  testing.  Live  testing  is 
expected  to  begin  after  all  necessary  inert  shots 
have been completed. 
Summary and Conclusions 
the  Air  Force  Research 
Laboratory sought to develop a test that provided a 
quantitative  determination  of  an  explosive  fills 
reaction  threshold  during  a  low  pressure  long 
duration event. To achieve this goal a series of key 
metrics  was  determined  and  several  potential  test 
designs  were  evaluated  in  their  ability  to  match 
Distribution A. Approved for Public Release. Distribution Unlimited 96TW-2014-0033. 
threshold  based  on 
key  parameters  regarding  the  explosive  fill  to 
include  pressure  in  the  fill  duration  of  that 
pressure relative velocity of the explosive and its 
container and an independently validated ignition 
parameter  developed  by  Lawrence  Livermore 
National  Laboratory.  The  outcome  of  the  design 
effort  was  the  High  Explosive  Survivability  Test. 
The  test  allows  for  the  determination  of  an 
explosives  reaction 
velocity of a gun launched projectile that impacts 
the  setup.  The  test  is  easy  and  inexpensive  to 
operate with the ability to conduct several tests in 
a short period of time. This will allow for use of 
the  test  as  a  screening  tool  for  future  explosive 
development efforts and will help to quantify the 
concept  of  the  explosives  reaction  threshold 
during these events. Additionally the fact that the 
in  nature  allows  for  a 
determination  of  margin  of  survivability  when 
given a specific set of conditions to match. This is 
currently  available  materials.  Overall  the  High 
Explosive  Survivability  Test  offers  a  unique 
simple  safe  and  robust  approach  to  measure  the 
ability  of  an  explosive  payload  to  survive  long 
duration low pressure events. 
Future  work  in  this  area  will  consist  of 
the evaluation of several live fills in terms of their 
reaction  thresholds  with  respect  to  low  pressure 
long duration events. 
The  author  would  like  to  thank  Anyar 
Inc.  Mr.  Don  Bland  of  Bland  Engineering  and 
Faxon  Machining  for  their  involvement  with  the 
design  and  development  of  the  HEST  apparatus 
gas gun and mounting structure. The author would 
also  like  to  thank  Mr.  Aaron  Howell  and  Mr. 
Chuck  Thames  for  installation  of  the  gas  gun  on 
the trailer and Dr. Mario Fajardo for assistance in 
design  and  implementation  of  the  fiber-optic 
velocity system. In addition the author would like 
to thank the processing personnel at the Energetic 
Materials  Branch  and  the  range  personnel  at  the 
Damage Mechanisms Branch of AFRL for casting 
their  assistance  with 
Furthermore  the  author  would  like  to  thank  Dr. 
Bradley  White  and  Dr.  Brian  Plunkett  for  their 
assistance in design evaluation. The author would 
also  like  to  thank  Mr.  Venton  Lamont  and  Ms. 
contracting effort. Finally the author would like to 
explosive  test  development  working  group  who 
contributed  their  thoughts  and  ideas  to  make EXPERIMENTAL FACILITIES TO CHARACTERISE EFFECTS OF 
MULTIPHASE BLAST EXPLOSIVES 
C. Collet A. Combe N. Daly K. Woirin 
christelle.colletherakles.com alban.combeherakles.com nicolas.dalyherakles.com 
HERAKLES SAFRAN Group Le Bouchet Research Centre 
karol.woirinherakles.com 
Abstract.  Herakles  Safran  Group  has  developed  new  types  of  high  explosives  for 
several  years  in  its  Le  Bouchet  research  centre  France.  Currently  Multiphase  Blast 
eXplosives MBX are being investigated within the scope of two research projects. 
We  have  shown  experimentally  that  the  introduction  of  an  important  mass  content  of 
reactive particles e.g. aluminum increased significantly the blast effects by producing an 
additional  amount  of  energy  which  is  then  released  during  the  expansion  of  the 
detonation products. This new family of explosive compositions is called Enhanced Blast 
We  have  also  shown  recently  that  the  use  of  dense  inert  particles  incorporated  in 
explosive  formulations  could  lead  to  much  better  control  of  the  lethal  area  around  the 
target. Indeed Dense Inert Metal Explosives DIME produce an increased impulse effect 
blast    particles  in  near  field  whereas  these  effects  are  dramatically  decreased  in  far 
Fully  integrated  into  these  projects  is  the  development  of  experimental  facilities  to 
characterize these new types of explosives as well as new numerical models designed to 
take into account the specific aspects of multiphase detonation products behaviour. As a 
consequence a whole new methodology combining experiments and calculations is being 
created to better characterize and predict the effects delivered by these new families of 
high explosives. This article deals with the experimental development of the study. 
Context and Introduction 
constraints  of  new  war  theatres  efforts  have 
focused  on  the  development  of  new  types  of 
weapons  able  to  generate  specific  effects  such  as 
enhanced  blast  effects  or  low  collateral  damages 
For  these  new  types  of  ammunitions  new 
High  Explosive  HE  compositions  have  to  be 
developed to deliver the desired effects. The aim is 
to  enhance  blast  and 
confined  spaces  or  to  enhance  the  damage  in  a 
reduced  area  around 
the  explosion  point 
associated with a strong decrease of effects beyond 
the limits of this area. 
temperature  effects 
To  obtain  such  effects  new  high  explosives 
have been developed containing a high content of 
metallic  particles  either  aluminium  or  tungsten. 
These  high  explosives  are  commonly  called 
Multiphase  Blast  eXplosives  or  MBX  because 
their detonation products contain a gaseous phase 
and a solid phase. Aluminium particles are known 
for  their  ability  to  burn  after  the  detonation 
process producing extra heat and pressure effects. 
MBX which contain aluminium particles for their 
ability  to  produce  pressure  and  blast  effects  are 
commonly  called  EBX 
for  Enhanced  Blast 
The  high  density  of 
tungsten  particles 
contributes  to  convert  a  part  of  the  detonation 
energy into kinetic energy able to project the fine 
dense  inert  particles.  In  doing  so  these  particles 
generate  strong  impulse  effects  at  close  hand  but 
due  to  their  high  density  they  fall  down  on  the 
ground quickly after their projection before lethal 
distance.  These  MBX  are  also  called  DIME  for 
Dense Inert Metal Explosives. 
The two targeted effects are shown in Figure 
SAFRAN Group Research Center has developed 
new  explosive  compositions  able  to  generate 
advanced effects enhanced blast or low collateral 
damages  when  used  in  an  adapted  system.  A 
family  of  cast  Plastic  Bonded  eXplosive  PBX 
compositions has been identified and characterised 
safety  detonics  mechanics  and 
vulnerability aspects. 
As  these  new  formulations  contain  a  high 
mass  content  of  metallic  particles  up  to  40  of 
aluminium for EBX and up to 80 of tungsten for 
DIME  some  difficulties  have  been  encountered 
in  properly  characterizing 
their  performance. 
Indeed  the  high  temperature    high  velocity 
particles  projected  by  the  detonation  of  such 
explosives  may  severely  damage  the  devices 
placed around the charge to evaluate the effects. 
Standard High Explosive HE
Standard High Explosive HE
Enhanced Blast eXplosive EBX
Enhanced Blast eXplosive EBX
Pressure history targeted for Enhanced Blast 
Damage curve targeted for low collateral effects 
Figure  1    Profile  of  damages  as  a  function  of 
the  distance  from  the  explosion  point  for 
enhanced  blast  vs 
low  collateral  effects 
Other  other  authors  have  also  faced  these 
difficulties and many creative solutions are found 
in published literature. 
Afterburning effects are exacerbated by shock 
wave  reflections  on  obstacles.  However  E. 
Rottenkolber  and  W.  Arnold  have  demonstrated 
that only a few percent of aluminium less than 5 
for  TNT  were  able  to  react  with  air  in  an  open 
field  configuration  2.  As  a  consequence  and 
except  for  numerical  fitting  it  is  useless  to 
evaluate  EBX  in  such  a  configuration.  Therefore 
the  best  way  to  evaluate  EBX  consists  of  testing 
them  inside  a  confined  or  semi-confined  volume 
such as a vessel for small samples or a detonation 
chamber  for  larger  samples.  Nevertheless  the 
volume of air enclosed with EBX when testing has 
to  provide  sufficient  oxygen  to  oxidize  all  the 
aluminium particles present.  
configuration are numerous  
the  atmosphere  can  be  controlled  it  is 
possible  to  test  the  explosive  samples  in 
air  but  also  in  an  inert  or  a  reactive 
atmosphere  N2  or  O2  for  example  so 
that the afterburning processes are or are 
pressure  sensors  can  be  placed  in  the 
walls  of  the  vessel    bunker  to  measure 
shock wave reflections until a quasi-static 
the  performances  of  EBX 
compositions  but  also  to  fit  numerical 
multiphase detonation products 
is  very  pertinent 
The  main  disadvantage  of  such  a  confined 
configuration is that visualization is more difficult 
because  of  the  fireballs  intense  light  which 
visualizations very rarely provide quantitative data 
of sufficient quality. 
the  camera  sensors.  Moreover 
Some  examples  of  confined  vessels  are 
available  in  open  literature.  Among  the  most 
recent papers we highlight here the work of Zhang 
et  al  3.  The  authors  have  been  able  to  record 
long-time  pressure  histories  obtained  in  a  bunker 
with  different  EBX  containing  Al  or  Ni-Al 
particles  of  different  particle  size  distributions. 
They  have  also  been  able  to  obtain  fireballs 
visualizations presented in the article as well. 
In contrast it seems more pertinent to evaluate 
DIME  in  an  open  field  configuration  so  that  the 
dense particles have enough space to be projected 
without being stopped by any other obstacles apart 
from the measurement devices witness plates for 
example.  It  is  then  possible  to  visualize  the 
phenomena  globally.  As  the  fireball  is  not  as 
intense  as  for  EBX  it  is  also  possible  to  extract 
these  visualizations 
velocities particle jets trajectories Widener et al 
proposed a very complete arena test configuration 
4 including wooden and steel witness plates and 
Another  advantage  of  such  configuration  is 
that  the  dense  particles  can  be  recovered  on  the 
ground  making  the  measurement  of  the  effect 
radius  of  these  particles  easy.  For  the  study 
presented  in  1  we  were  lucky  enough  to 
precisely see the cartography of tungsten particles 
on  the  ground  due  to  the  snow  which  captured 
them and fixed the shape of the particle cloud.  
The  picture  taken  after  one  of  the  tests  is 
presented in Figure 2. 
Figure  2   Picture  taken  after  a  DIME 
detonation in open field 
In  developing  new  EBX 
compositions  we  also  had  to  develop  specific 
characterization methodology in order to select the 
most  promising  candidates 
evaluations.  For  some  test  facilities  we  were 
inspired by previous studies described in scientific 
publications  and  we  also  developed  novel 
concepts such as a loophole for tungsten particles 
see  1.2.  As  a  consequence  this  paper  presents 
our  vision  of  the  best  way  to  characterize  MBX 
In the first part we will focus on small scale 
experimental  facilities  specifically  developed  to 
characterize the particles behaviour aluminium or 
tungsten  contained  in  MBX  to  enable  a  first 
selection of the most promising candidates. 
The  second part  of  the presentation  will  deal 
with two new experimental methods developed in 
Le  Bouchet  Research  Centre  to  evaluate  MBX 
effects in large scale configurations 
Dispositif  Tournant  Rcuprateur  A 
Particules is a rotating system to enable 
capture of dense particles throughout the 
duration of the test. 
-  The  CITIF  system  in  French  Cible   
Impulsion Totale Instrumente en Force 
is  a  fixed  momentum  trap  in  which  the 
force  sensor  which 
integrates  the  cumulated  effects  of  blast 
In the last part we propose a methodology to 
evaluate MBX from small scale to larger scale in 
development or an optimization process. 
the  best  candidates 
1.  METHODOLOGY  TO  CHARACTERIZE 
At  small  scale  it  could  be  hazardous  to 
evaluate  EBX  or  DIME  compositions  because 
there is a size under which they do not show their 
potential effects. This critical size or diameter has 
been  designated  by  Zhang  et  al  under  the  term 
CDPI  for  Critical  Diameter  for  Particles  Ignition 
5.  The  risk  is  then  to  make  a  wrong  selection 
because the hierarchy found at small scale may not 
be the same as at larger scale. One has to be very 
careful  when  characterizing  MBX  at  different 
scales.  A  numerical  support  is  a  good  way  to 
extrapolate data from small scale to large scale but 
it is not always possible. The following paragraphs 
emphasise  the  problems  encountered  in  each 
configuration  and  how 
1.1 A Confined Vessel for EBX 
This  configuration  gives  access  to  pertinent 
data  about  afterburning  phenomena 
pressure  temperature  and  light  histories  recorded 
by sensors placed in the walls of a confined vessel 
or inside it such as the one shown in Figure 3. 
The dimensions of the vessel are 2 m long with an 
inner diameter of 280 mm. It is divided in 3 parts 
with  a  pressure  and  a  temperature  sensor  in  each 
part. The explosive sample diameter and height of 
25 mm is placed in a sample carrier with a hole 
for  the  detonator  this  vessel  is  therefore  only 
semi-confined.  In  the  opposite  closure  plate  a 
photodiode  is  placed  to  record  the  light  emission 
The  sample  dimension  may  be  very  small  in 
this  configuration  compared 
diameters  of  common  EBX  which  are  highly 
loaded  in  aluminium.  Even  if  the  EBX  does  not 
detonate properly the main goal is to disperse the 
reaction  products  gas  and  particles  inside  the 
vessel and to make them react as much as possible 
through  shock  wave  reflections  inside  the  vessel. 
The  error  made  by  not  taking  into  account  the 
detonation  process  in  this  configuration  is  highly 
compensated  by  the  amount  of  available  data  we 
get from such tests. 
Figure  3   Picture  of  the  confined  vessel 
developed  for  small  scale  evaluations  of  EBX 
and  example  of  pressure  histories  obtained 
Indeed  the  recorded  signals  give  access  to 
data on the following parameters 
from  pressure  histories 
duration mean quasi static pressure 
impulse  histories  obtained  by 
the  raw  pressure  signals 
impulse  values  at  different  durations  20 
and 60 ms for example 
from  temperature  histories  an  indication 
of the maximum temperature recorded by 
the sensors can be obtained but this value 
is  only  indicative  due  to  the  too  long 
standard  thermocouples.  To  get  closer 
to  the  real  temperature  a  high  speed 
pyrometer  or  infrared  camera  should  be 
used through an adapted window 
on  the  contrary  photodiodes  have  very 
possible to record the light duration from 
the  voltage  history  using  these  sensors. 
The  photodiode  levels  can  be  compared 
from  one  test  to  another  but  a  proper 
calibration could also be used to estimate 
temperature values. 
1.2 A Loophole for DIME 
For  DIME  and  especially  for  those  which 
contain a very high amount of tungsten particles it 
is not useful to evaluate them at small scale as the 
results  are  difficult  to  compare  and  they  only 
depend on the amount of explosive content in the 
composition.  However  it  is  still  possible  to  use 
small scale tests for understanding how the dense 
particles  are  projected  and  to  characterize  their 
To  do  so  we  developed  a  loophole  system 
comprised of two steel walls facing each other. In 
one  wall  we  placed  8  light  sources  and  in  the 
other wall in front of each light source we placed 
a photodiode. A sketch of this facility is presented 
Figure  4   Sketch  of  the  loophole  system 
developed for DIME evaluations at small scale 
to  detonation.  When 
explosive sample is detonated it is possible to see 
a short but strong light increase in the photodiode 
signals. However when particles pass through the 
light  sources  are  successively 
attenuated and the photodiode signals go below the 
reference  level.  The  greater  the  number  of  dense 
particles  passing  through  the  loophole  the  more 
attenuated the photodiodes signals. This process is 
illustrated in Figure 5.  
Light peak shock front
Light peak shock front
Light peak shock front
Light peak shock front
Figure  5   Loophole 
examples of signals recorded by 1 photodiode in 
the case of a standard HE top view or a DIME 
By  comparing  the  8  photodiode  signals  for 
each  test  it  is  then  possible  to  get  the  particles 
velocities  the  trajectories  of  the  fastest  and 
slowest  ones  and  it  is  also  possible  to  see  if  the 
particles  cross  the  primary  aerial  shock  wave   
Also  using  this  test  configuration  to  compare 
different  DIME  compositions  it  is  possible  to 
know  which  one  attenuates  most  the  photodiode 
signals  that  is  to  say  which  projects  the  densest 
2. EVALUATION AT LARGER SCALE 
As said before for large scale evaluations of 
EBX and DIME compositions we tested EBX in a 
semi-confined detonation chamber roughly 8 x 8 
x  8  m  approximately  500  m3  and  DIME  were 
evaluated  in  open  field.  For  the  use  of  both  test 
configurations  we  had  to  develop  new  advanced 
devices  able  to  record  pertinent  parameters  over 
Momentum traps are known for their ability to 
measure total impulse from the cumulated effects 
of blast and particles such as the ones detailed by 
Sanders in 6. These devices are very simple easy 
to implement and to analyse the collected data but 
they do not give any temporal information. 
Witness plates or recovery containers are very 
useful  to  inform  on  the  amount  of  projected 
particles on a given surface but again they do not 
give any temporal information. 
Both devices described in the following parts 
have been designed to solve this lack of temporal 
Rcuprateur A Particules 
The French name given to this system roughly 
means  rotating  particle-catching  device.  The 
goal of this system is to capture the dense particles 
projected  by  the  detonation  over  time  in  order  to 
know the size of the particles and the chronology 
of their appearance by post mortem examination of 
the recovery system.  
The  rotating  system  has  been  designed  to 
differentiate the particles according to their arrival 
along  the  time  inspired  from  the  study  of  Frost 
A cylindrical film support coated with HTPB 
binder is used to trap particles during their flight. 
The assembly is rotated by a pneumatic motor. An 
adjustable  streak  allows  the  passage  of  variable 
amount  of  particles  during  the  test  that  will  be 
trapped by the HTPB coating. The rotation speed 
up  to  6000  rpm  is  controlled  by  an  adjustable 
valve. The system is designed so that no more than 
one rotation occurs during the total passage of the 
particles.  The  DISTRAP  system  is  presented  in 
Steel structure designed 
Figure 6 Sketch of the DISTRAP system 
After  some  calibration  tests  it  is  possible  to 
recover a coating in which the dense particles have 
been fixed along the time as shown in Figure 7.  
The test configuration was as follows 
-  High  Explosive  B2277A 
composition  see  1  for  more  details 
about this composition 
-  HE  dimensions  cylinder  90  mm  in 
diameter 100 mm in height 
-  Distance HE - DISTRAP 1 m 
-  Rotation speed 2800 rpm 
Figure  7  Picture  of 
recovered after test 
It is also possible to identify the beginning of 
the  record  by  synchronizing  an  initiation  device 
e.g. an igniter with the detonator which initiates 
the  main  charge.  By  doing  so  the  particles 
produced  by  the  igniter  mark  the  T0  instant.  By 
recording  precisely  the  rotation  speed  it  is  then 
possible to date the arrival time of the particles. 
The coating from Figure 7 is then ready to be 
analysed it can be cut in some parts of the same 
size  and  weighed  to  obtain  the  concentration  of 
dense particles by area. The size of particles over 
time  can  be  determined  by direct  visualization  or 
compared  the  signals  from  a  reflected  pressure 
sensor  and  from  the  CITIF  system  at  the  same 
distance from Hexomax RDX based explosive 
The  results  showed  a  good  match  in  peak 
pressure  but  the  force  signals  from  the  CITIF 
seemed  to  oscillate  after  the  shock  due  to  shock 
wave  reflections  into  the  CITIF  device.  We  have 
then reduced the target plate thickness in order to 
reduce its mass and then decrease the oscillations. 
The  second  step  was  to  evaluate  the  CITIF 
ability to measure additional impulse generated by 
particles impacts.  
Some  examples  of  signals  obtained  during 
these preliminary tests are shown in Figure 9. 
Instrumente en Force 
In  order  to  measure  over  time  and  at  a 
specific  distance  the  combined  impulse  of  blast 
and  particles  we  have  designed  a  new 
experimental facility called CITIF for the French 
Cible  Impulsion Totale Instrumente en force 
inspired from the works of Sanders et al 6. The 
CITIF  system  is  a  fixed  momentum  trap  with  a 
force sensor placed behind the target see Figure 
8. It is then possible to quantify the force applied 
on  the  target  over  time  and  to  date  the  time  of 
arrival of blast and particles. 
Figure 8 Sketch of CITIF system 
The  first  step  for  preliminary  evaluations 
consisted  in  evaluating  the  CITIF  ability  to 
properly measure the blast pressure. To do so we 
Figure 9 Pressure histories with Hexomax 
RDX  based  HE  without  metallic  particles  on 
the top and with a DIME loaded with tungsten 
particles on the bottom 
We can see on Figure 9 that even though the 
oscillations still remain pressure history with the 
DIME  on  the  right  they  are  strongly  reduced 
after  the  change  in  the  target  plate  thickness. We 
can also see that the peak pressure measured by the 
CITIF  is  much  higher  in  the  case  of  the  DIME 
composition  than  in  the  reflected  pressure  one 
which supposedly measure the blast impulse only.  
It  can  be  deduced  that  the  CITIF  system  is 
well designed to measure the combined effects of 
both blast  and  particles over  the  time  which  is  a 
great  advance  compared  to  standard  momentum 
traps  used  traditionally  for  MBX  evaluations.  It 
can also be mentioned that this system saves a lot 
of space in the test layout compared to momentum 
traps because the space behind the momentum trap 
stand  to  recover  the  target  after  test  is  no  longer 
2.3 Large Scale Validation 
Both  systems  detailed 
paragraphs have been introduced into test layouts 
to evaluate our new family of MBX compositions 
EBX in a detonation chamber and DIME in open 
They both have been able to do the job they 
were  designed  for  except  for  the  DISTRAP 
system  which  was  not  able  to  catch  any  particle 
from DIME large scale evaluations. The reason is 
that  the  DISTRAP  was  placed  too  far  from  the 
charge because of over estimation of the particle 
cloud radius. As a consequence the particle cloud 
narrowly  missed  the  device  and  the  tungsten 
particles did not have enough kinetic energy to be 
trapped by the HTPB coating as shown in Figure 
10. The works described in references 1 and 8 
give more details about the test configurations and 
results  obtained  on  EBX  and  DIME 
Figure  10   Frame  extracted  from  high 
speed visualizations in open field configuration 
at the end of the fireballs expansion  
3.  METHODOLOGY  PROPOSED  FOR  MBX 
In  a  development  or  optimization  process  of 
new MBX compositions based to our experience 
it  is  now  possible  to  propose  a  methodology  to 
select  the  best  candidates  at  each  development 
step from small to large scale. This methodology 
is  mainly  based  on  experiments  but  a  numerical 
support  is useful  as  mentioned  before especially 
in the case of scale evolutions. In the frame of our 
development  process  we  also  developed  a 
numerical  model  called  DECO  able  to  simulate 
blast effects and particles trajectories. More details 
on this model and its use are given in 9. 
The  methodology  we  propose  is  summarised 
in Table 1 where the types of characterization are 
given for both MBX families EBX and DIME. 
As  the  specific  effects  are  absolutely  not 
homothetic  in  the  case  of  MBX  charges  the 
recommended  measurement  devices  presented  in 
Table  1  have  to  be  placed  at  different  distances 
from  the  charge  and  if  possible  along  different 
Table  1   Recommendations  of  pertinent  characterization  parameters  and  devices  for  MBX 
evaluations at different scales 
Particles cloud trajectories 
obtained by facilities such as 
Pressure and photodiodes in 
confined or semi-confined spaces 
Temperature measurements only 
for comparison purpose 
High speed visualization for 
qualitative description of phenomena 
generally more than 1 
Confined configurations 
Open field configurations 
Standard pressure gauges for 
overpressure measurements at 
different distances from the charge 
Standard pressure gauges for 
overpressure measurements at 
different distances from the charge 
Total impulse measurement 
devices if possible with temporal 
resolution such as CITIF 
Total impulse measurement 
devices if possible with temporal 
resolution such as CITIF 
Witness devices if possible with 
temporal resolution such as 
Witness devices if possible 
with temporal resolution such as 
Global high speed visualization 
for qualitative description of 
visualizations for particles cloud 
CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES 
In  the  frame  of  the  development  of  new 
containing a high mass ratio of metallic particles 
new  experimental  devices  have  been  designed  at 
Le  Bouchet  Research  Centre  to  evaluate  the 
specific  effects  generated  by  EBX  or  DIME 
Some  errors  have  been  made  and  work  still 
remains  to  be  done  but  we  are  now  able  to 
methodology  to  be  used  in  the  frame  of  an 
optimization or development process of such MBX 
compositions.  This  methodology  is  based  on 
demonstrated  that  a  numerical  support  could  be 
very  pertinent  especially  for  extrapolating  data 
from one scale to another. Rapid Small-Scale Assessment of Detonation Performance Using Disc Acceleration 
K. Thomas Lorenz P. Clark Souers Edward L. Lee and Ron Chambers 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA USA 94551 
Energetic Materials Center 
Abstract.    The  early  performance  evaluation  of  a  new  explosive  is  often  limited  by 
available  sample  material.  Dynamic  evaluations  generally  require  measurements  of 
detonation velocity pressure and expansion energy. These experiments typically require 
large  amounts  of  material  time  and  expense  and  are  often  omitted  or  replaced  by 
numerical estimates from thermochemical codes. The new experimental testing method 
to be described here requires only small charges and obtains accurate measurement of all 
of  the  three  detonation  performance  characteristics  in  a  single  test.  The  design  a  disc 
acceleration experiment DAX assures an initial condition of steady detonation and a 
charge-geometry amenable to 2D hydrodynamic calculation. This experimental method 
has been described in detail in a paper 1 by Lorenz and Lee where the tests and analysis 
were concentrated on a known PETN based explosive for the purpose of establishing the 
accuracy of the method and to provide a standard for comparison with other explosives. 
In this paper we will present results and analysis for a sequence of explosives exhibiting 
a  range  of  detonation  behavior  that  is  progressively  less  ideal  than  PETN.  The 
sequence consists of PBX 9404 Composition-B UFTATB and LX17. Our experimental 
results  are  first  compared  to  simulations  using  a  JWL  equation-of-state  EOS  derived 
from  Cheetah  and  a  rate-independent  model.  Deficiencies  in  this  type  burn  model 
increase as the material becomes less ideal. We use a set of front-curvature data along 
with a simple reactive flow model JWL 2 to establish the reaction kinetics. We then 
refit the DAX data by making an adjustment to the original Cheetah CJ pressures. We 
demonstrate the generality of the new models against an array of DAX and curvature data 
for the four sample explosives. 
Small-scale experiments are the most efficient 
methods  of  characterizing  new  explosives  in  the 
early phases of an RD program. But these same 
small-scale  methods  are  most  susceptible  to  rate 
effects.  The  option  of  testing  large  charges  may 
not  be  viable  if  sufficient  quantities  of  a  new 
material are not yet available.  An alternative is to 
use small enough charges that respect the limits of 
available  sample  material  but  still  large  enough 
for the explosive to exhibit steady-state detonation. 
These  small  charges will  certainly  be  affected  by 
the  burn  kinetics  which  will  skew  the  measured 
performance  metrics  downward.  The  only  option 
remaining  to  the  RD  team  is  to  field  the 
experiment  and  analyze  the  results  with  a  ratedependent model. In principal the new model can 
then  be  used  to  predict  full-scale  performance  of 
The  more  usual  methodology  is  to  wait  for 
sufficient  quantities  of  material  and  perform  a 
full-scale cylinder test 3. Standard cylinder tests 
at  LLNL  have  a  charge  diameter  and  length  of 
25.4  mm  and  254  mm  respectively.  This  will 
require 300 grams of sample material but the test 
can  provide  the  high-precision  data  necessary  to 
develop  an  accurate  Jones-Wilkins-Lee  EOS  4 
the  backbone  for  either  rateindependent  or  rate-dependent  predictions  of 
configuration.  Additional  tests  are  required  to 
characterize  the  burn  kinetics  needed  to  write  an 
accurate rate-dependent model. A few rate models 
in current use and listed in order of complexity are 
JWL 2 Ignition and Growth 6 and CREST 
7.  The  additional  testing  might  require  multiple 
rate sticks to measure the detonation velocity size 
effect rate sticks for front curvature divergence or 
corner turning tests and finally gas gun or wedge 
tests  to  the  shock  initiation  behavior.    The  total 
costs  and  material  required  are  high  enough  that 
most  new  explosives  and  explosive  formulations 
receive  direct  characterization  and 
designers  must  rely  on  numerical  estimates  from 
thermochemical codes. These can be accurate but 
for  certain  classes  of  materials  those  exhibiting 
less  ideal  detonation  behavior  the  numerical 
estimates may prove to be unacceptable. 
test.  The  design  assures  an 
The  Disc  Acceleration  Experiment  DAX 
was  designed  to  acquire  basic  performance  data 
using minimal resources. DAX requires only small 
charges and obtains accurate measurement of all of 
the three detonation performance characteristics in 
condition  of  steady  detonation  and  a  chargegeometry 
calculation.  The  velocity  history  of  a  thin  metal 
disc  placed  at  the  end  of  the  charge  is  measured 
with laser velocimetry. The detonation velocity is 
obtained with probes along the charge length. This 
experimental method has been described in detail 
in a paper 1 by Lorenz and Lee where the tests 
and analysis were concentrated on a known PETN 
based explosive for the purpose of establishing the 
accuracy of the method and to provide a standard 
for comparison with other explosives. This test can 
be  used  as  a  stand-alone  performance  test  and 
burn  rates  can  be  inferred  from  careful  modeling 
efforts.  However  we  use  this  test  in  conjunction 
with  detonation-front  curvature  data  from  rate 
stick  measurements  to  make  an  independent 
determination  of  the  burn  kinetics.  The  curvature 
tests can also be run at small-scales  as small as 
one  desires  as  long  as  steady  detonation  is 
achieved.  These  two  sets  of  small-scale  data   
front plate push velocity-time data and detonationfront  curvature  data  are  combined  with  a  very 
simple  reactive  flow  model  JWL  to  deliver  a 
predictive  rate-dependent  model  using  minimal 
explosive material time and costs.  
Figure  1  shows  a  schematic  of  the  basic 
design  of  the  DAX  assembly.  It  consists  of  a 
12.7mm  diameter  sample  having  a  length  of 
76mm.  With  the  addition  of  a  PBX-9407  booster 
94  RDX 6  VCTFE  most  new  and  existing 
explosives  obtain  steady-state  propagation  before 
the front reaches the end of the rate stick. At that 
the  detonation  products  expand  and 
accelerate  a  thin  metal  disc  425m  Al  in  most 
cases  which  is  tracked  using  Photonic  Doppler 
Velocimetry PDV. PDV is a technique that was 
developed  at  LLNL.  It  has  exceptionally  high 
precision  and  requires  a  minimum  of  equipment 
8. Standard piezoelectric timing pins are used to 
track the detonation velocity 9. We normally fire 
3-4 assemblies at the same time reducing facility 
costs.  The  schematic  shows  only  the  essential 
aspects  of  the  assembly.  The  acrylic  PMMA 
sleeve  that  surrounds  the  explosive  pellets  holds 
the PDV probe on the geometric axis at a position 
100 mm from the metal witness disc. 
We  have  recently  replaced  the  425m  Al 
witness  discs  with  254m  Cu  discs.  The  copper 
has  3x  more  areal  density  than  aluminum  and 
therefore  generates  more  tamping  against  the 
expanding  product  gases.  This  tends  to  generate 
better  coupling  between  the  gas  momentum  and 
disc  acceleration  resulting  in  a  more  efficient 
system.  We  have  seen  as  much  as  50  more 
kinetic energy in the copper witness discs than the 
aluminum  witness  discs  for  a  given  explosive. 
Timing  pin  data  is  acquired  and  treated  in  the 
standard  way  for  extracting  detonation  velocities. 
The times for the pin signals are plotted against the 
pin  positions  and  fit  to  a  linear  function  and  the 
slope of the fitted line is reported as the detonation 
velocity. The timing pins cover most of the 75 mm 
of  sample  material  at  12.7  mm  intervals.  We 
generally see very little change in the velocity over 
that  sample  distance.  For  non-ideal  explosives 
steady-state  behavior  may  require  longer  run 
distances.  Note  that  the  pins  technically  are 
measuring  the  phase  velocity  of  the  detonation 
front  at  the  edge  of  the  charge.  However  for 
steady  detonation  this  phase  velocity  is  equal  to 
the centerline detonation velocity. 
Fig.  1.  Schematic  of 
the  Disc  Acceleration 
generally  convert  40-50  of 
detonation energy to wall energy. 
We will perform DAX tests on a series of four 
different  explosive  formulations    ranging  from 
insensitivenon-ideal.  All 
formulations  are  standard  well-known 
HMXCEFNitrocellulose 
63361  RDXTNTwax  Ultrafine  TATB 
TATBFK-800.  The  samples  were  die-pressed 
into  12.7x12.7  mm  right  cylinders.  Each  DAX 
assembly  then  consisted  of  an  EBW  detonator 
13 a 12.7x12.7 mm PBX 9407 booster and six 
sample  pellets.  Densities  for  the  pressed  pellets 
were  help  to  the  target  density    0.005g.  Target 
densities for the four explosives were 1.830 gcc 
PBX  9404  1.702  gcc  Comp-B  1.800  UFTATB and 1.903 LX-17.  
Figure 2 shows the disc trajectories velocity 
versus  time  for  our  four  explosive  formulations. 
The initial motion of the foils rear surface away 
from  the  sample  is  a  free  surface  jump-off 
velocity  that  is  approximately  twice  the  inmaterial  particle  velocity.  An  analysis  of  this 
jump-off  region  can  be  used  to  extract  the  CJpressure  1.  The  disc  continues  to  accelerate  in 
steps  due  to  the  reverberating  pressure  wave 
inside  the  disc.  This  is  a  common  condition  for 
foils  and  thin  plates  driven  by  explosives.  The 
time-dependent  pressure  wave  Taylor  wave 
behind  the  detonation  front  results  in  a  series  of 
compression and release waves in the disc which 
are observed as accelerations and decelerations of 
the back surface of the witness disc. The measured 
disc  trajectories  correlate  with  the  energy  of  the 
expanding  product  gases.  The  disc  velocities  can 
be  used  to  determine  the  energy  release  of  the 
explosive  much  as  one  does  with  the  wall 
velocities in the cylinder test. As stated above the 
fraction  of  available  energy  in  the  detonation 
products  that  couples  to  kinetic  energy  in  the 
experimental  geometry  and  relative  masses  of 
explosive  and  witness  material.  However  in  any 
given experimental geometry we generally assume 
that  the  fraction  of  detonation  energy  coupled  to 
is  dependent  upon 
The  core  performance  metric  for  the  DAX 
technique  is  the  time-dependent  behavior  of  the 
thin metal witness disc that is positioned at the end 
of the charge column. The launch and subsequent 
acceleration of this disc is tracked using Photonic 
Doppler Velocimetry or PDV 8. The energy of 
the  expanding  product  gases  is  reflected  in  the 
trajectory of the accelerating disc. Aziz has made 
estimates  of  coupling  efficiencies  to  the  witness 
plate  for  a  one-dimensional  idealized  case  10. 
The  amount  of  energy  coupled  to  a  witness  plate 
depends  on  the  relative  masses  of  the  explosive 
and  witness  plate.  The  maximum  coupling 
converts  about  35  of  the  available  detonation 
energy for this geometry into kinetic energy of the 
witness  plate.  Peak  coupling  occurs  for  an 
explosive metal-to-charge mass ratio MC of 1223.  For  DAX  the  mass  of  explosive  is  poorly 
defined.  Gurney  analyses 
participating  explosive  mass  consists  of  a  degree 
cone  of  material  behind  the  plate  11  12. 
Depending  upon  the  analysis  the  cones  base 
angle can be anywhere between 60 and 70 degrees. 
This  assumption  converts  25-30  of 
detonation  energy  into  kinetic  energy  of  the  disc 
30-35  for  250m  Cu  discs.  Cylinder  tests 
witness  motion  is  constant  across  all  explosives. 
This assumption allows us to correlate the witnessdisc energy to detonation energy in the explosive 
and to make relative rankings of energy release in 
different explosives. 
Fig.  2.  DAX  velocity-time  profiles  for  four 
explosive  formulations  ranging  from  semi-ideal 
PBX 9404 to non-ideal LX-17. The jump-off 
region see text is the section of data falling in the 
first 0.1s up to second velocity jump. 
relative volumes as large as 7 or even 10. These 
larger  volumes  capture  80-90  of  the  available 
detonation  energy.  The  DAX  geometry 
susceptible  to  lateral  release  at  gas  expansions 
approaching  3.  However  nearly  70  of  the 
available metal pushing energy has been expended 
at that small volume. DAX provides data on three 
critical  performance  metrics  detonation  velocity 
CJ or detonation front pressure and gas energies 
performance metrics offer exceptional utility in the 
relative  ranking  of  current  and  new  explosive 
formulations  DAX  data  can  be  used  to  generate 
predictive  EOSs.  Once  an  accurate  EOS  is 
full  capabilities  of  a  new 
formulation  are  readily  available  by  scientists 
engineers and weapons designers. 
relative  volumes  of  2.4.  While 
Building Predictive Performance Models 
The  Jones-Wilkins-Lee  EOS  is  one  of  the 
best-known models for describing the behavior of 
expanding detonation gases 4 5. 
This  pressure  form  can  be  combined  with  two 
additional  expressions  for  an  adiabatic  expansion 
and the CJ-state tangency condition for a system of 
three equations that can be solved for pressure and 
energy  as  a  function  of  the  relative  volume  V. 
Basic  detonation  behavior  can  be  accurately 
modeled using a JWL EOS in programmed burn 
mode if rate effects are small. This is the case for 
the  ideal  explosives  such  as  PETN.  A  JWL 
requires  7  input  parameters  but  4  of  those  are 
experimentally  determined  values 
unreacted  density  detonation  velocity  CJpressure 
experimentally verifiable. The other 3 can be input 
by trial and error or one may use a thermochemical 
code to make an initial guess for fitting purposes. 
As  a  demonstration  exercise  we  used  the  LLNL 
thermochemical code Cheetah 14 to provide full 
JWLs  to  be  used  as  initial  starting  points  for 
modeling the DAX data. These initial guess JWLs 
will be modified in a series of steps to arrive at a 
late-time  velocities  correlate 
expansions of 2-3. Shot-to-shot velocity deviations 
in  this  region  are  usually  less  than  1  with 
consistent  sample  densities.  We  have  plotted 
multiple  shots  for  each  formulation  2  for  PBX9404  2  for  Comp-B  4  for  UF-TATB  and  6  for 
LX-17. The velocity spread for LX-17 is indicative 
of  stochastic  detonation  behavior  due  to  the 
nearness of the charge size to its failure diameter  
rather  than  deviations  in  the  build  specifications. 
The  relative  detonation  performance  energies 
correlate  to  Gurney-type  energies  and  can  be 
calculated from the kinetic energies of the witness 
The  detonation  energies  for  PBX  9404  Comp-B 
UF-TATB  and  LX-17  rank  as  1  0.84  0.66  and 
0.62  respectively.  These  can  be  compared  to 
calculated  detonation  energies  at  VV0    2.4 
from Cheetah 14 of 1 0.81 0.70 and 0.74. The 
standard cylinder test measures the wall energy at 
explosive formulation. Figure 3 shows a series of 
plots  of  JWL  model  simulations  performed  in 
programmed  burn  mode  no  rate  dependence 
overlaid onto the DAX data. 
Fig.  3.  Rate-independent  modeling  of  DAX  data. 
The  hydrodynamic  simulations  were  run  using 
programmed burn and used JWL product EOSs 
from Cheetah as initial guesses. 
The  JWL  simulation  for  PBX  9404  matches  the 
DAX  data  very  closely.  The  front  jump-off 
velocity  is  slightly  low  but  the  late-time  disc 
velocity  is  nearly  perfect.  The  Comp-B  model 
achieves  a  close  match  to  the  late  time  velocity 
but  the  jump-off  velocity  is  a  poor  match  to  the 
DAX data. The Cheetah JWL in this case gives a 
CJ  pressure  of  only  25.6  GPa  which  is  at  least 
determinations 15 16. The same can be said for 
the  Ultrafine  TATB  formulation.  The  LX-17 
datamodel  provides  a  more  complex  case.  It  has 
been  long  recognized  to  have  a  reaction  zone  on 
the  order  of  1-3  mm  which  is  thicker  than  the 
witness disc. As  such  the  jump-off  region  of  the 
DAX  data  will  show  a  response  to  the  von 
Neumann  spike  pressure.  The  poor  match  at  late 
times  shows  a  large  energy  discrepancy  between 
the  experiment  and  model  at  relative  volumes 
between 1 and 3. It is most likely due to chargesize  effects.  The  charge  diameter  is  close  to  its 
failure diameter and the strong rate effects lead to 
diminished  detonation  performance  and  a  disc 
independent  model  velocity.  A  rate-dependent 
model is required to adequately fit the DAX data. 
We can use the rate dependence of the small-scale 
DAX  data  as  an  opportunity  to  calibrate  a 
predictive rate-dependent model for each of these 
explosive formulations. 
The JWL model is a very simple model that 
uses a JWL form for the detonation product gases 
and a Murnaghan form for the unreacted explosive 
solid.  The  Murnaghan  is  a  2-parameter  form 
where    depends  on  the  sound  speed  C0  of  the 
The value of C0 can be measured or approximated 
from the initial density in mms 0.285  1.200 
17.  The  value  of  n  is  set  for  a  von  Neumann 
pressure equal to 1.25x the CJ pressure. Figure 4 
shows  a  heuristic  diagram  of  the  JWL  and 
Murnaghan used in establishing a JWL EOS for 
UF-TATB.  JWL  uses  partial  pressures  to  mix 
pressures  and  sound  speeds  of  the  reacted  and 
unreacted  species.  The  reaction  rate  is  a  function 
of  the  reaction  progress  variable  F  the  pressure 
P and the artificial viscosity Q. 
In  this  study  we  will  use  the  simplest  form  of 
JWL  and  set  b    2  and  c    1.  The  only 
remaining variable to set is the total rate constant 
shows  a  single  simulation  solid  line.  For  this 
case there was no modification of the CJ pressure 
in the Cheetah JWL see below. 
G.  This  important  parameter  must  be  iteratively 
guessed  or  determined  from  an  independent 
measurement. We will choose the latter case. For 
each  of  the  four  explosive  formulations  we  have 
on-hand  one  or  more  data  sets  from  frontcurvature  profile  measurements.  We  have  used 
these  curvature  profiles  as  independent  metrics 
of  the  incipient  detonation  burn  kinetics.  We 
establish  the  value  of  the  burn  constant  G  by 
iterative  fits  to  the  curvature  data.  We  will  use 
only one set of curvature data for each explosive  
the  charge  size  or  charge  confinement  need  not 
match the DAX geometry. 
Fig. 5. JWL simulations fit to curvature data for 
calibrating the burn rate G for UF-TATB 
Note  that  these  simulations  dashed  lines  but 
solid line for LX-17 all lie close to or below the 
DAX  data.  The  rate-dependent  model  always 
releases  the  available  detonation  energy  more 
slowly than a rate-independent model.  Despite the 
low  velocities  the  model  profiles  are  a  better 
match  to  the  shape  of  the  DAX  velocity-time 
profile than the programmed burn simulations. We 
might assert here that this is due to a better match 
between  the  model  and DAX  data of  the rate of 
the  expanding  detonation 
Fig. 4. JWL and Murnaghan EOSs used to build 
the  rate-dependent  JWL  EOS  to  model  UFTATB. 
Figure 5 shows curvature modeling for UF-TATB 
along  with  model  front  profiles  for  several  trial 
values of G. Usually only 2-3 trials are needed to 
obtain  an  adequate  fit  to  the  curvature  data.  The 
fits are not sensitive to small changes in the JWL. 
Curvature  fitting  simulations  generated  burnrate constants that trend as one would expect. The 
rates for PBX 9404 Comp-B UF-TATB and LX17 from the fits are 4000 1500 1000 and 400 s1Mbar2  respectively.  These  burn  rates  were  then 
used to re-model the DAX data using JWL. The 
original  Cheetah  JWL  parameters  were  retained. 
The rate-dependent DAX simulations are shown in 
Figure 6 dashed lines. Note that the LX-17 case 
Fig.  6.  JWL  rate-dependent  modeling  of  DAX 
data.  The  dashed  lines  used  the  original  Cheetah 
JWLs  and  burn  rates  calibrated  from 
curvature  data.  The  solid  lines  are  JWL 
simulations  using  an  adjustment  to  the  original 
Cheetah CJ pressures. 
What is the source of the discrepancy between 
the  JWL  model  and  the  DAX  data?  It  is  most 
likely due to the value of the CJ pressure given by 
Cheetah.  Cheetah  CJ  pressures  tend  to  be  lower 
than  experimental  values.  For  example 
Cheetah CJ pressures for Comp-B and UF-TATB 
are 25.6 GPa and 23.9 GPa respectively. Previous 
experimental efforts have assigned much higher CJ 
pressures  to  these  formulations.  From  extensive 
modeling  efforts  we  can  say  that  the  DAX 
geometry is very sensitive to the CJ pressure 1. 
Given  this  assertion  we  can  make  a  very  simple 
change  to  the  model  and  adjust  the  input  CJ 
pressure  while  leaving  the  remainder  of  the 
adjustable  values  in  the  JWL  untouched.  The 
values of A and B in Eqn. 1 will change so that the 
JWL  remains  energy-balanced.  CJ  pressures  and 
simulations  were  iterated  until  we  established  an 
acceptable  fit  to  the  DAX  data.  Usually  only  2-4 
simulations  were  needed.  Zoning  was  set  to  give 
10-15 zones in the metal disc which was sufficient 
to  ensure  near  convergence.  These  calculations 
required about 15 minutes of wall time each. The 
CJ-modified JWL simulations are also shown in 
Figure  6  as  solid  black  lines.  The  original  and 
adjusted  CJ  pressures  are  listed  in  the  legend  for 
each plot. We have also included the measured and 
model  detonation  velocities.  The  new  ratedependent  disc  velocities  match  the  DAX  data 
extremely  well.  The  matches  are  remarkable 
considering  that  we  put  few  resources  into  these 
models. The experimental resources include smallscale  DAX  measurements  plus  one  detonationfront  curvature  profile.  Each  type  experiment 
requires  less  than  20  grams  of  sample  material. 
Then we began simulations using a Cheetah JWL 
as  a  first  order  guess.  We  modeled  the  curvature 
this  JWL  and  obtained  an 
independent  burn  rate  calibration  which  was 
subsequently  used  to  remodel  the  DAX  data.  A 
final  adjustment  to  the  original  CJ  pressure 
brought  the  fully  rate-dependent  JWL  model 
into agreement with the DAX data. How general  
or predictive are these new JWL models? 
The first test of the predictive capability of the 
new JWL models will be to test the UF-TATB 
model  against  a  series  of  DAX  measurements 
using successively higher-mass discs. The 425m 
aluminum  disc  was  changed  to  copper  in  two 
thicknesses  254m  and  515m.  These 
changes  increased  the  effective  areal  mass  of  the 
witness  discs  by  2x  and  4x.  The  DAX  data  and 
JWL model simulations are shown in Figure 7.  
calibration of the curvature experiment back to the 
validation  modeling  of  the  DAX  experiment.  We 
have additional DAX data for Comp-B which was 
dimensionally  scaled  by  2x.  We  repeated  the 
Comp-B  experiments  using  254m  thick  copper 
discs. These were then repeated in for another set 
of  scaled  experiments  where  all  critical 
dimensions    charge  diameter  and  length  acrylic 
wall  thickness  and  witness  disc  thickness  were 
scaled  by  2x.  Scaling  shots  are  of  general  use  in 
testing the scope of rate effects. When rate effects 
the  detonation  hydrodynamics 
scale.  This  can  be  tested  by  overlaying  the  data 
from the two geometries onto a plot with a scaledtime axis. Figure 8 shows DAX data and JWL 
simulations for this scaling evaluation. 
Fig.  7.  Testing  the  calibrated  JWL  models 
against  extended  data.  These  UF-TATB  data  use 
successively higher disc masses to test the model 
against increasing Gurney MC ratios. 
We  used  the  same  model  for  all  three  Gurney 
conditions  and  the  fits  are  excellent.  The  only 
adjustment to the calibrated JWL model shown 
in Fig. 6 was to the Al disc thickness. We thinned 
the disc to 415m to better match the oscillations 
in the DAX data. The 2 adjustment falls within 
the current uncertainty in our measurements of the 
disc  thicknesses  and  also  represents  our  largest 
experimental  uncertainty  in  the  current  DAX 
The  second  test  for  these  rapid-assessment 
models will be to evaluate their effectiveness when 
the  charge  size  changes  significantly  from  the 
calibration  charges.  Both  the  DAX  and  curvature 
data  for  the  Comp-B  formulation  used  charge 
diameters of 12.7mm. No charge-size effect was 
Fig.  8.  Scaling  experiments  for  estimating  rate 
effects.  The  gray 
dimensionally scaled DAX experiments see text. 
This  kinetic  effect  is  captured  very  well  by  our 
JWL  model  which  calibrated  against  two 
separate small-scale data sets. 
The gray traces show the DAX data and the 
solid black lines show the JWL simulations. For 
the  12.7mm  charge  diameter  the  data  is  plotted 
unchanged.  The  data  for  the  25.4mm  DAX  have 
been scaled by dividing the time values by 2x and 
overlaying these scaled data onto the same axes 
used  by  the  smaller  DAX.  Note  that  the  disc 
velocity for the larger DAX is higher even though 
we  used  the  same  charge  density  and  batch  of 
material.  This  is  a  typical  effect  of  burn  kinetics 
performance. In this case the effect is fairly small. 
The  maximum  velocity  difference  is  2.  We 
would expect that additional charge size increases 
would show increasingly smaller effects. Does our 
calibrated rate model capture this effect? It does in 
fact  capture  the  effect  rather  well.  We  used  the 
exact  same  model  that  we  show  for  the  12.7mm 
charge and 425m aluminum disc. The simulations 
are slightly higher than the DAX results indicating 
that the model could therefore benefit from some 
additional  tuning.  But  the  size-effect  has  been 
approximately the same increase in velocity as the 
DAX  data.  A  set  of  design  calculations  could 
therefore  be  used  to  estimate  the  charge  sizes 
needed  to  lower  the  rate  effects  to  the  desired 
outcome.  This  is  a  faster  cheaper  alternative  to 
additional large-scale experiments. 
The  third  evaluation  of  this  rapid  assessment 
technique will be performed on LX-17. Detonation 
challenging to model with either high accuracy or 
across a large variety of experimental geometries. 
The trend over the last couple of decades is to add 
complexity to the models in order to gain accuracy 
andor  scope.  For  our  purposes  we  are  trying  to 
achieve  acceptable  accuracy  and  predictive 
capability  from  our  model  using  a  minimum  of 
resources    material  time  and  costs.  Of  the  four 
formulations  tested  in  this  paper  it  is  clear  that 
LX-17 exhibits the strongest rate effects. We have 
previously  estimated  the  failure diameter  for  LX17  at  these  nominal  densities  at  about  8.25  mm 
18.  The  model  calibrations  were  carried  out  on 
charges  having  a  12.7mm  diameter  only  a  little 
larger  than  the  failure  diameter.  This  leads  to 
strong  rate  effects  but  can  also  work  for  us  by 
giving  us  added  sensitivity  when  calibrating  the 
burn rate constant. Figure 9 shows curvature data 
for two LX-17 charge sizes 12.7mm and 25.4mm 
along  with  JWL  simulations  using  the  smaller 
charge  data  for  calibration.  A  simulation  using  a 
burn  rate  value  of  400s-1Mbar2  fit  the  smallcharge  data  very  well.  However  the  same  model 
under-performs in the larger charge. A higher burn 
rate  would  be  needed  to  flatten  the  curvature  for 
the 25.4mm charge-diameter. This is an effect that 
we  have  seen  for  several  different  cases  while 
attempting to use JWL. It is surprising that this 
simplest  reactive-flow  model  fits  these  two  data 
sets this well. A more complex model is needed to 
the  overall  burn  rate.  Alternatively 
accurately  capture  the  complex  burn  kinetics 
associated  with  large  changes  in  charge  size. 
JWL  has  an  enhanced  form  that  adds  an 
initiation term FF0a as an additional multiplier 
exponents  b  and  c  that  we  set  to  2  and  1 
respectively in the total burn rate function could 
be varied. We will explore these options in future 
Fig.  9.  Modeling  LX-17  curvature  data  for  two 
different charge diameters  12.7mm and 25.4mm. 
A  JWL  model  was  calibrated  using  12.7  mm 
charges and applied to the larger charge data. 
Figure  10  shows  LX-17  DAX  data  for  two 
charge  sizes    the  12.7mm  charge  diameter 
presented  above  and  a  17mm  charge  diameter 
using a 410m copper witness disc. The simulated 
disc energy for the larger DAX experiment also is 
lower  than  the  experimental  data  by  about  4-6. 
This  may  be  due  to  the  inadequacy  of  an  overly 
simple  reactive  flow  model  or  it  may  be  in  part 
due  to  relying  on  a  flawed  initial  JWL  from  the 
modifications  to  the  JWL  or  to  the  available 
parameters  in  JWLs  rate  law  might  make 
satisfactory corrections. However the goal of this 
project  was  to  develop  a  set  of  small-scale 
experiments  that  could  be  used  together  with  a 
simple  reactive-flow  model  to  obtain  a  90 
solution  to  describe  the  performance  of  new 
explosive formulations  using minimal resources. 
To this end this effort looks promising. The large
thermochemical 
performance  characterization  of  explosives  and 
for developing accurate EOS. We can compare the 
disc  energies obtained from  the  small-scale  DAX 
testing  with  detonation  energies  obtained  from 
cylinder tests for our four explosive formulations 
relative  to  LX-16    which  we  will  utilize  as  an 
Fig.  10.  Charge  size  effects  for  LX-17  DAX 
Table 1 shows the relative disc energies of the 
five formulations for aluminum and copper discs. 
The data for copper discs is limited but does show 
a slight shift of the DAX rankings toward the trend 
observed in the 25.4-mm cylinder test results. We 
diameter cylinder test results. Here we see a slight 
decrease in energy for the LX-17 results. The LX17 remains the outlier for DAX. However as we 
stated  above  DAX  is  lightly  confined  and  more 
sensitive  to  rate  effects  than  comparable  charge 
size data from cylinder tests. 
Table 1 Energy Rankings at V  V0  2.4 
We  also  tracked  the  model  detonation  velocities 
from the JWL simulations. JWL is capable of 
modeling detonation-velocity size effects 19. For 
this paper there was good agreement 1 error 
with experimental data for PBX 9404 and CompB. But the model velocities for UF-TATB and LX17  were  about  4  higher  than  the  experimental 
data.  We  attribute  this  in  part  to  the  high 
detonation  velocity  values  from 
Cheetah  JWLs.  Modifications  to  the  Cheetah 
JWL  estimates  would  certainly  result  in  better 
agreement  with  the  entire  package  of  small-scale 
The DAX test was designed for rapid performance 
characterization  of  new  explosives  and  explosive 
formulations  -  using  the  minimum  resources 
available.  DAX  readily  captures  three  critical 
performance  metrics  detonation  velocity  CJ 
pressure  and  the  detonation  energy  at  relative 
volumes of 2-3. The shot-to-shot precision is less 
than 2 energy in most cases and can be lower 
than 1 in cases having small kinetics effects. It is 
complements  the  standard  cylinder  test.  But  it 
costs about 10x less than the cylinder test to field. 
The  design  uses  less  than  20  grams  of  explosive 
configuration. This charge size can introduce burn 
rate  effects  but  this  feature  also  gives  us  the 
sensitivity  to  obtain  accurate  reactive-flow  model 
its  12.7-mm  diameter 
the  CJ  state  and 
Burn  rate  parameters  are  calibrated  against 
companion  small-scale  detonation-front  curvature 
data  using  the  JWL  reactive  flow  code.  The 
curvature  data  can  be  obtained  at  any  convenient 
charge diameter. This data is modeled using a trial 
JWL  and  an  iterative  fit  using  guesses  for  the 
burn-rate  constant.  Once  the  burn  rate  is  fit  to 
curvature  data  additional  fits  are  made  to  the 
DAX  data  using  the  fully  calibrated  JWL 
model.  Additional  corrections  may  be  needed 
such as for low CJ-pressure values. The corrected 
JWL  models  were  validated  against  extended 
data  sets  which  included  Gurney  variations  and 
size effects. The DAX design is scalable and can 
be used to test highly non-ideal explosives. 
The experiments and JWL rate model rely 
on steady detonation conditions. Although JWL 
has  the  architecture  to  enable  a  poor  mans 
initiation  model  accurate  characterization  of 
initiation  behavior  would  likely  require  a  more 
This  work  was  funded  by  the  Joint  DoDDOE 
Munitions Technology Development Program and 
DOENNSAScience  Campaign  1  and  Enhanced 
Surveillance Campaign. This work was performed 
under  the  auspices  of  the  U.S.  Department  of 
Energy  by  Lawrence  Livermore  National 
Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344. Cookoff Violence of PBX 9501 in a Quasi-2-dimensional Configuration The Effects 
of Ignition Location and Confinement Strength 
Gary R. Parker Matthew D. Holmes Eric Heatwole Philip Rae Peter Dickson 
Group WX-6 HE Thermal and Mechanical Response Team 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM USA 
Abstract.  We  describe  an  experiment  to  investigate  the  interplay  of  confinement 
strengthinertia ignition location and 2-dimensionality on the process of deflagration-todetonation transition in low-porosity e.g. 1 thermally damaged PBX 9501 subjected 
to  realistic  conditions  for  cookoff  events.    Response  ranged  from  high-velocity  highenergy  deflagration  to  DDT.    Confinement  strength  was  shown  to  be  consequential  in 
terms  of  reaction  violence  when  ignition  location  was  in  close  proximity  to  the  case.  
However when ignition occurred further from the case the thickness of the case did not 
appear  to  influence  the  propensity  for  DDT.    For  these  deeper  ignitions  DDT  was 
observed.    We  propose  a  new  mechanism  relying  on  shock  reflection  that  effectively 
shortens  DDT  run  length  31.75  mm  for  confined  thermally  damaged  PBX  9501.  
Lastly we performed Gurney analysis to calculate a high energy-transfer efficiency 7688 to metal fragments produced by DDT in the tested configuration. 
PBX  9501  has  been  observed 
violently  including  undergoing  deflagration-todetonation transition DDT following ignition in 
understand safety margins and to mitigate violent 
explosive  responses  we  need  to  improve  our 
understanding  of  the  conditions  that  cause  or 
The  deflagration-to-detonation  transition  as 
the  name  suggests  captures  the  process  from 
which  a  slow  subsonic  pressure-dependent 
deflagration  transitions  to  a  rapid  super-sonic 
detonation.  The process is driven solely from the 
energetic material.  The chemical potential energy 
the  combustion  of 
released  must  be  converted  to  kinetic  energy  at 
high  velocity  to  form  a  shock  with  sufficient 
strength and duration to initiate detonation.  How a 
smooth  continuous  process  like  burning  leads  to 
the  development  of  a  discontinuous  shock  front 
has  been  the  subject  of  research  and  speculation 
for  over  half  a  century  producing  a  variety  of 
theorized  mechanisms. 
  The  details  of  one 
particularly  well-supported  mechanism  describing 
this  process  referred  to  as  Type  I  DDT  can  be 
found in the chapter by McAfee5. 
steady  deflagration  open 
atmosphere  hot  product  gases  are  free  to  expand 
the  burning  surface.  
However if the burning solid is confined such that 
product  gases  cant  escape  a  positive  feedback 
will  accelerate  pressurization  and  HE  surface 
Previous work on the subject of DDT in hot 
thermally  damaged  PBX  9501  was  performed 
within strong heavy steel tubes to impose quasi-1dimensionality1. 
understanding of DDT mechanisms in a contrived 
confinement  used  was  not  representative  of  what 
would be considered typical or realistic for a cased 
explosive  e.g.  a  conventional  weapon.  The 
purpose  of  the  experiments  described  here  is  to 
confinement  to  start  to  understand  how  boundary 
effects  and  2-D  divergent  flow  influence  DDT 
Figures  1    2  show  the  experiment  that  was 
designed.  A  cylindrical  slab  of  PBX  9501  was 
sandwiched between two heavy steel platens.   The 
circumferential  surface  of  the  explosive  was  also 
confined with a thin copper or steel ring.  With the 
use of bolts  the platens compressed the edges of 
the ring and enclosed the HE.  The assembly was 
designed  to  permit  only  radial  expansion  during 
deflagration owing to the relative weakness of the 
ring  in  comparison  to  the  much  higher  mass 
strength  and  thickness  of  the  axially  oriented 
platens.    In  actuality  axial  deformation  was  also 
observed when DDT occurred how we dealt with 
this  is  addressed  in  following  sections.  The  PBX 
9501  was  machined  to  2.1  mm  thickness  by  63.5 
mm diameter with an initial density of 1.83 g cm-3.  
The wall thickness of the confining ring was either 
1 or 2 mm.  The thickness of the top and bottom 
platens was 38.1 mm with a diameter of 88.9 mm. 
Because we are investigating HE response in 
an  abnormally  hot  thermal  environment  good 
temperature control was essential.  To accomplish 
this both platens were surrounded by band heaters 
that  were  controlled  with  a  temperature  process 
controller.  The  top  platen  had  five  through-holes 
temperature  of  the  top  surface  of  the  HE  one  on 
the cylindrical axis and four 90 degrees apart near 
regression.    This  acceleratory  deflagration  is  one 
of  the  key  components  of  all  DDT  mechanisms 
and  is  particularly  important  in  supporting  wave 
explosives with little-to-no porosity 
for  DDT  evolution 
When  gas-tight  mechanically  strong  and 
heavy inertial confinement exists surrounding an 
explosive  charge  DDT  is  most  likely  because 
pressure  rise  will  be  most  extreme.    Under  these 
conditions nearly all of the energy liberated by the 
deflagration  will  be  available  to  do  work  on  the 
unreacted solid fraction of the explosive.  Further 
it  is  likely  that  with  such  high  pressure  the  solid 
will  be  stressed  beyond  its  strength  and  fracture 
creating  additional  surface  area  and  exacerbating 
the pressure amplification process.  
On  the  other  extreme  unconfined  explosives 
are least likely to undergo DDT because products 
gases are free to escape the exception to this rule 
is when an unconfined explosive of sufficient mass 
is  ignited  in  a  location  where  its  own  inertia 
provides  critical  confinement  to  amplify  pressure 
sufficiently for DDT to occur.   
confinement a competition is established between 
processes  that  amplify  pressure  and  those  that 
dissipate it.  Pressure amplification is controlled by 
the  chemistry  of  the  energetic  material  and  the 
deflagration.  However because deflagration rates 
are subsonic or at most sonic with respect to the 
influence  of  boundary  conditions  cannot  be 
ignored.    When  confinement  such  as  casing  is 
weak or light the pressure generated from the burn 
can  do  work  on  it  i.e.  it  can  cause  expansion  of 
the  case  and  that  portion  of  energy  will  not  be 
available  to  support  DDT.    If  the  confinement  is 
pressurization  rate  will  decrease.    Under  these 
circumstances  reaction  may  not  evolve  beyond 
steady  deflagration  or  may  quench  entirely.  
Unfortunately  because  this  regime  of  the  DDT 
is  subsonic  and  boundary-conditioncontrolled  the  complex  multi-dimensional  multiscale  spatially  and  temporally  and  multi-phase 
interactions  described  above  make  it  difficult  to 
predict an outcome with existing DDT models 
the  deflagrating  solid 
initially  gas-tight  or 
the  confinement  ring.    A  representative  thermal 
profile is shown in figure 3.  The HE was heated to 
an initial soak at 185C for 30 minutes followed 
by a second soak at 210C for another period 30 
minutes  after  which 
ignition  occurred.  The 
thermocouples  reported  good  thermal  uniformity 
rarely  differing  by  more  than  1C  except  during 
the  thermal  ramp  when  the  radial  thermocouples 
reported higher than the center this is an expected 
consequence  of  the  radially  located  band  heaters 
driving heat from the circumference inward. 
Fig.  1.  Cutaway  view  of  the  experiment.    This 
variation is shown with the slit for optical access.  
Without the slit the top platen was a solid cylinder. 
Bolts and most PDV probes omitted for clarity. 
Fig.  2.  Assembled 
thermocouples and PDV fibers installed. 
test  with  band  heaters 
Fig. 3. Representative thermal profile. 
On the cylindrical axis of the bottom platen a 
hole  was  drilled  to  accept  a  glow  plug  resistive 
  For  some  tests  the  HE  was 
intentionally ignited in the center after a 30-minute 
duration at the second soak temperature.  For the 
other tests the HE was soaked until it self-ignited 
this  took  longer  than  30  minutes  at  the  second 
soak temperature.   
For some of the trials the top platen had a slit 
filled with a glass microscope slide to allow streak 
imaging  of  reaction  progress  along  a  diameter  of 
the  disk  otherwise  the  platen  was  solid  steel.  
Surrounding  the  confinement  ring  were  8  Photon 
Doppler  Velocimetry 
separated  by  45  degrees  and  oriented  to  measure 
the radial velocity of the confinement ring during 
expansion.  In addition to post-mortem inspection 
top  and  bottom  steel  platens  axial 
deformation  was  measured  with 
profilometer.  When the PDV diagnostics reported 
clean reflections it was possible to extract time-offirst-motion  data  and  use  this  along  with  an 
assumption  that  the  pressure  waves  within  the 
confinement moved at the same velocity in every 
direction  to  estimate  an  ignition  location  using  a 
multi-lateration  technique.  The  ignition  point  was 
used to measure the DDT run length.  Breakout of 
detonation  was  obvious 
from  characteristic 
darkening of the metal Fig. 4 and the degree of 
axial  deformation  of  the  steel  platens  in  the 
darkened regions Figs. 11  13.  Multi-lateration 
was  only  needed  when  the  explosive  cooked  off.  
In other cases we controlled ignition location with 
the glow plug ignitor.     
To  estimate  porosity  at 
following the thermal soak and HE decomposition 
a  numerical  model  was  used. 
employed  Dicksons  four-step  HMX  kinetics6  to 
generate  a  thermal  field  based  on  the  measured 
boundary  temperatures.    The  thermal  field  served 
as  input  into  a  separate  first-order  Arrhenius 
decomposition  model  for  HMX  and  the  binder 
system  components  from  which  mass  loss  was 
estimated7  8.  The test assembly was not gas tight 
so decomposition product gases could escape and 
porosity  would  be  generated.    Lastly  the  model 
considered  thermal  expansion  and  the  density 
change  of  the    HMX  phase  transition  and 
assumed  that  the  hot  HE  would  flow  and  occupy 
vacancies  within  the  confinement.  Figures  5    6 
show the surface of a PBX 9501 sample that was 
damaged  with  the  same  thermal  profile  used  for 
the ignited tests.  Voids are evident in distinct sites 
distributed  across  the  surface.    The  voids  are 
darkened which we take to be indication of  lateonset  high-temperature  exothermic  chemistry 
possibly pyrolysis and that this samples damage 
state was frozen very near in time to when cook 
off  would  have  occurred.  This  damage  pattern  is 
interesting  in  a  more  general  sense  in  how  it 
shows the presence of multiple candidate ignition 
sites on an approximately isothermal HE surface. 
Results and Discussion 
Test details and results are displayed in table 
Fig. 4. A representative dataset of an edge-ignited test test 11.  The top platen is shown in the center with 
the  darkened  crescent  characteristic  of  the  region  where  detonation  occurred.    A  The  ignition  location 
determined from multi-lateration of time-of-first-motion PDV data. B Shock evident in PDV. C Terminal 
velocity of the shock driven fragment. 
Estimation of Porosity 
1.  More detailed discussion follows. 
Table 1.  Test matrix details and results. 
expanding the confinement ring.  The PDV records 
also showed evidence of high-velocity gas blowing 
by the confinement ring resutling from the diffuse 
reflection  of  myriad  miniscule  particulates 
entrained  in  the  product  gas  flow.  Gas  blow-by 
would  further  reduce  the  energy  transfer  to  the 
ring.  The end result in terms of terminal velocity 
v  was  still  noteworthy  despite  the  losses  and 
measured with PDV were moving at 1 mm s-1.  
Effect  of  Ignition  Location  and  Confinement 
During  thermal  insult  depending  on  heating 
rate self-ignition can occur in different locations.  
For  example  when  the  heating  rate  is  high  fast 
cookoff  ignition  tends  to  break  out  near  an 
external  boundary  closest  to  the  applied  thermal 
source.    In  contrast  with  slow  heating  rates  or 
isothermal  soaks  slow  cookoff  ignition  tends  to 
occur  deeper  within  the  charge.    Comparison  of 
tests  5  and  13  demonstrate  the  importance  of 
ignition location.  Both tests employed a 1 mm Cu 
ring  for  confinement  but  differed  in  ignition 
Baseline Detonation Test 
Test  2P  was  intentionally  detonated  on  the 
cylindrical axis to serve as a baseline result of the 
radial motion of the confinement ring from which 
comparisons could be made and effective Gurney 
values  calculated.    The  measured  velocity  was 
1.371 mm s-1. This experiment was also modeled 
with  the  CTH  hydrocode  to  follow  a  simulated 
tracer particle on the confinement ring agreement 
with the PDV record was excellent Fig. 7. 
Test 2 was ignited with the glow plug ignitor 
resulting  in  a  rapid  deflagration  1-1.3  mm  s-1 
but not DDT Figs. 8  9.  In this test there was 
no measurable deformation of the top and bottom 
platens  indicating  all  of  the  product  gas  was 
moving  radially.    As  a  result  the  energy  transfer 
efficiency to the metal ring was high. On the other 
hand  because  the  deflagration  wave  was  slow 
relative  to  a  detonation  wave  not  all  of  the 
chemical  potential  energy  was  liberated  early 
enough  in  time  to  contribute  to  useful  work 
location.    Test  13  self-ignited  at  the  edge  near 
the  confinement  resulting  in  rupture  of  the  ring 
loss of gas tightness and subsequently extinction 
of  the  burn  Fig.  10.    In  contrast  test  5  was 
ignited  in  the  center  and  underwent  DDT.    The 
pronounced  difference 
consequence  of  moving  the  ignition  inwards  by 
approximately  32  mm  to  a  location  where  the 
deflagration and pressurized product gases had to 
travel through unreacted HE before approaching a 
boundary where gas could begin to escape. 
Fig.  5.    Wide  field-of-view  microscopy  of  the 
surface of the HE following thermal treatment and 
the  plentiful  darkened 
decompositions  sites.    The  box  shows  the  region 
zoomed into in Fig. 6. 
Fig.  6.  Higher  magnification  micrograph  of  a 
decomposition site.   
Run Length and DDT Mechanism 
Fig.  7.    a  PDV  record  from  an  intentionally 
detonated  baseline 
test.  b  The  PDV  data 
compared  with  hydrocode  simulation.  c  The 
bottom  platen  showing  characteristic  darkening 
across the entire HE-steel contact region. 
When  confinement  was  thicker  e.g.  test  11 
and  test  3  the  ignition  location  did  not  matter 
both  tests  underwent  DDT.    Comparing  Test  13 
to    11  demonstrates  how  the  greater  persistence 
of  the  confinement  was  enough  to  significantly 
enhance the violence. 
The  two  tests  that  were  edge-ignited  both 
transitioned  to  detonation  in  approximately  56 
mm.    This  is  longer  than  distances  measured  for 
similar  amounts  of  porosity  in  earlier  work  with 
the  1-D  Hot  DDT  Tube  experiments1.    Those 
experiments  were  more  heavily  confined  and  did 
not  permit  2-D  divergence  as  is  the  case  here.  
They  were  similar  in  all  other  respects  e.g.  hot 
and  similarly  damaged  by 
produce  similar  void  fractions.    Comparative  run 
lengths in the 1-D arrangement were 30-35 mm.  
The  deformation  profile  in  the  top  and  bottom 
platens of the 2-D test are qualitatively similar to 
those seen in the walls of the tubes in the 1-D tests 
Fig.  11  suggesting  that  in  both  cases  the  DDT 
not  captured.  Our  proposed  mechanism  is  similar 
to  the  Type  I  mechanism  for  most  of  the  process 
evolution  differing  only  at  the  end  when  the 
growing  shock  reflects  off  a  higher  impedance 
case  rather  than  continuing  to  grow  and  travel 
forward into unreacted HE.  The shock reflection 
causes  stagnation  and  pressure  amplification  that 
initiates  a  detonation  traveling  inward.  Similar 
reverse-direction  detonations  have  been  observed 
in  other  DDT  research9-11  and  are  sometimes 
referred  to  as  retonations.    This  mechanism  was 
evident  with  both  2    1  mm-thick  confinement 
rings.  Examination of the deformation profile for 
hypothesis Fig. 13 showing relatively deep dents 
just inside of the confinement boundary and also at 
the center where the converging detonation would 
again  cause  higher  pressure  to  exist. 
symmetry of the deformation was high indicating 
the DDT process was also axially symmetric with 
time-of-arrival  of  the  shock  at  the  case  boundary 
being  synchronized.    The  effect  of  ignition  away 
from  the  cylindrical  axis  has  not  been  evaluated.  
The  other  important  effect  of  this  mechanism 
distance from ignition to breakout of detonation. 
it  effectively  shortens 
three  center-ignited 
Fig. 10.  Test 13 shown here was edge-ignited.  
The  thinner  1  mm  Cu  ring  ruptured  near  the 
the  deflagration  was 
extinguished.  Note the arrows identifying regions 
of  binder  extrusion  from  the  HE  matrix  and 
outside  of  the  confinement  ring.    It  is  likely  that 
confinement  boundary  would  have 
variation in burn behavior.  This is an observation 
worthy of further study. 
resulting  binder-lean 
mechanism  was  the  samelikely  Type  I.    The 
increased run length in the 2-D test indicates that 
deformation  of  the  2  mm-thick  copper  casing 
utilizes a significant fraction of product gas energy 
and affects the rate of pressure amplification.  This 
reduces  energy  available  for  completion  of  the 
detonation  transition  in  a  shorter  distance.    This 
reduction  however  was  of  an 
magnitude to prevent DDT.  
Fig.  8.  Streak  image  of  test  2  showing  rapid 
deflagration on the order of 1 mm s-1. a Ignition. 
Fig. 9.  Ring expansion velocity from test 2. The 
higher velocity excursions 2.5 mm s-1 are the 
result of gas blow-by. 
For  the  remaining  center-ignited  tests  where 
DDT  occurred  tests  3  5    6  we  hypothesize 
that  another  transition  mechanism  was  accessed.  
The first piece of evidence for this hypothesis was 
seen  in  Figure  12  where  we  were  fortuitous 
enough to observe a luminous wave reflected from 
the  inner  edge  of  the  confinement  ring.    Even 
though  detonation  did  not  occur  in  this  particular 
test  we  believe  a  similar  reflection  phenomenon 
was  responsible  for  initiating  detonation  in  the 
others    where  unfortunately  streak  images  were 
analysis  also  assumes  that  chemical  potential 
energy is partitioned between the kinetic energy of 
the metal fragments and that of the product gases 
with  a  linear  velocity  profile.    It  is  only  suitably 
applied  to  detonating  explosives  where  there  is 
sufficient time for density equilibrium in the gases 
to  be  obtained  before  significant  motion  of  the 
confining metal has begun. With those limitations 
in  mind  we  have  applied  Gurney  analysis  to  a 
subset  of  the  data  where  DDT  occurred  in  an 
attempt  to  quantify  the  energy  transfer  efficiency 
To begin we used the equation for one of the 
canonical  Gurney  geometries  a  right  cylinder 
confined on its circumference13  
In  this  equation  E   is  the  characteristic  Gurney 
energy  for  the  explosive  composition  v   is  the 
velocity  of  the  metal  fragments  M  and C  are  the 
masses of the metal and the HE respectively for a 
representative cylindrical sector. 
In our case however the LD ratio of the HE 
piece was very small 0.0276 and end losses were 
not only expected but observed in the significant 
deformation of the top and bottom platens.  It was 
clear that a non-negligible fraction of the chemical 
energy  was  being  converted  into  plastic  work  in 
the  axial  direction  hence  not  contributing  to  the 
radial  acceleration  of  the  confinement  ring.    To 
quantify these losses we performed an intentional 
detonation  test  measured  the  ring  expansion 
velocity Fig. 7 and calculated an effective Gurney 
energy  Eeff  1.088 kJ  g-1 
experimental configuration.  Dividing our effective 
Gurney energy value by the characteristic Gurney 
energy  E  4.381  kJ  g-1  for  pristine  PBX  9501 
measured  in  carefully  controlled  cylinder  tests14 
shows  that  approximately  76  of  the  potential 
Gurney  energy  is  being  lost  with  this  design  to 
deformational  work  on 
between  the  ring  and  platens  and  gas  blow-by 
Further  it  is  possible  to  calculate  energy 
transfer efficiency i.e. the ratio of kinetic energy 
of  the  metal  to  chemical  potential  energy  of  the 
explosive  with the following equation13 
Fig.  11.  Profilometry  from  test  11  where  edgeignition led to DDT.  The increasing depth of axial 
deformation  from  the  ignition  side  to  detonation 
side  was  also  seen  in  test  1P  indicating  both 
reactions  progressed  similarly  through  a  Type  I 
Fig.  12.  Streak  image  showing  center-ignition  a 
with  deflagration  spreading.    At  location  b  a 
reflected  wave  can  be  seen  coming  off  the 
boundary  interface  and  traveling  inward  at  an 
initial  velocity  of  1.5  mm  s-1.    This  test  did  not 
transition to detonation but does offer insight into 
the DDT mechanism proposed in this article. 
Gurney-type Analysis 
The Gurney model12 is useful for describing a 
detonating  explosives  ability  to  accelerate  metal 
confinement.  It relies on energy being accounted 
for therefore significant leakage of product gases 
through the confinement and energy transfer in an 
direction  not  considered  will  cause  error.    The 
relatively  efficient  at  converting  chemical  energy 
into kinetic energy of fragments. 
Table 2. Gurney-type analysis values. 
a  v  average velocity from probes interrogating a 
portion of the ring being driven by detonation. 
bDDT did not occur Gurney-type analysis NA. 
low-porosity  e.g.  1 
We designed an experiment to investigate the 
interplay  of  confinement  strengthinertia  ignition 
location  and  2-dimensionality  on  the  process  of 
conditions for cookoff events.  We observed DDT 
in  a  majority  of  the  tests  regardless  of  ignition 
location  when  2  mm  Cu  confinement  was  used.  
However  thinner  1  mm  Cu  confinement  only 
permitted DDT when ignited at the center.  Edgeignition  as  occurs  with  fast  cookoff  scenarios 
caused  rupture  of 
deflagration was subsequently quenched.  For tests 
where  edge  ignition  occurred  and  deflagration 
transitioned  to  detonation  the  run  lengths  were 
longer  56  mm  than  what  was  observed  in  the 
more  heavily  confined  1-D  tests  though  the 
mechanism is also thought to be Type I.  This was 
not  the  situation  when  the  samples  were  centerignited  as  occurs  in  slow  cookoff  scenarios 
where a modified DDT mechanism is proposed to 
incorporate the possibility of shock reflections off 
high-impedance  casing  materials  and  reversegoing detonation back into the deflagrating HE.  In 
reflected  detonation  wave 
convergence  this  mechanism  effectively  shortens 
the  distance  over  which  DDT  can  occur  in  cased 
high explosives.  In our configuration this resulted 
in  run  lengths  31.75  mm  which  is  similar  to  or 
less  than  what  is  observed  in  the  1-D  tube  tests 
which when divided by the efficiency  D  of the 
intentionally detonated baseline test 2P reduces 
where  the  subscript  D  denotes  the  baseline  test 
Fig.  13.  Profilometry  from  test  3  where  center 
ignition led to DDT.  The axial deformation is axisymmetric and supports the concept of a reflected 
shock  causing  nearly  synchronous 
followed  by  a  convergent  detonation  wave.    The 
dent profiles for the other two center-ignited tests 
where DDT occurred are similar. 
The  normalized  efficiency  calculated  with 
effectiveness  of  driving  metal  from  DDT  in  hot 
thermally  damaged  HE  compared  to  a  complete 
detonation  of  pristine  PBX  9501  in  this  specific 
configuration.    The  results  are  located  in  table  2 
and  show  the  DDT  processes  in  this  series  of 
experiments to be 76-88 efficient regardless of 
mechanism.    Despite  the  HE  being  thermally 
degraded and the deflagration stage of DDT being 
slow  and  affected  by  early-time 
expansion  of  confinement  these  reactions  are 
strongerheavier confinement.   
levels  of  porosity  and  much 
rate  of  deflagration 
A  Gurney-type  analysis  method  was  used  to 
relate  the  energy  transfer  efficiency  of  DDT 
processes to full detonation and it was found to be 
quite  high  76-88  suggesting  that  despite  the 
detonation much of that early-time energy release 
is  available  on  a  relevant  timescale  to  do  work 
propelling  metal  fragments 
velocities.  This work offers important insight into 
safety  vulnerabilities 
containing  HMX-based  PBXs 
thermal environments. A FRICTION TEST FOR SIMULATING HIGH-PRESSURE INERTIAL 
Joshua Felts and Harold Sandusky 
Naval Surface Warfare Center 
Indian Head Explosive Ordnance Disposal Technology Division 
Indian Head MD 20640 
Abstract. Explosive fills in penetrating warheads experience friction with the case walls 
as  the  fill  compresses  and  moves  forward  when  the  warhead  impacts  its  target.    The 
standard friction tests used for judging handling safety have little confinement and low 
sliding rates  3 ms which are much different than the conditions of interest in a highvelocity  warhead  which  can  incur    stresses  on  the  order  of  100  MPa  and  sliding 
velocities around 50 ms.  This paper describes a laboratory-scale test that was developed 
using 12.7-mm diameter samples subjected to these conditions with initial tests on seven 
explosives.  Two explosive samples consisted of just an insensitive energetic ingredient 
and a binder another contained HMX NTO and aluminum Al and the remaining four 
included  ammonium  perchlorate  AP.  The  explosives  containing  AP  had  the  highest 
sensitivity whereas those with just an insensitive energetic ingredient were not able to be 
ignited.    While  the  relative  rankings  are  comparable  with  those  from  the  small-scale 
safety test the laboratory-scale test demonstrated inconsistencies occurring with standard 
particle sizes of AP and with an uncured binder.  Furthermore with the actual conditions 
known for a penetrating warhead this method can be used to screen candidate energetic 
fills for survivability.  
Explosive  fills  under  sudden  acceleration 
such as during a warhead penetration event compress within their container and then slide relative 
to the container wall.  Friction occurs between the 
explosive and container wall which is often lined 
or possibly within the explosive if it adheres to the 
container or its liner.  Following peak acceleration 
the  explosive  fill  rebounds  and  slides  along  surfaces that were just damaged which may include 
dislodged  explosive  crystals.    Until  the  motion  is 
fully damped this sliding process may repeat numerous  times. 
  Throughout  this  process  the 
explosive fill is confined but only subjected to one 
surface either a hard unlined container wall or a 
soft  lined  wall.    If  explosive  had  adhered  to  the 
wall the surface would be similar to the soft wall 
with explosives crystals lodged into the liner. 
The standard small-scale safety tests for sliding friction judge sensitivity to hand and machine 
operations  under  conditions  of  little  confinement 
and low sliding rates relative to the conditions of 
interest during a penetration event.  The Alleghany 
Ballistics Laboratory ABL machine provides up 
to 445 kgf 980 lbf on a 51-mm diameter by 3.2mm  thick  wheel  of  hardened  steel  that  is  fixed 
from  rotating  as  it  slides  across  the  sample  on  a 
hardened steel anvil at discrete velocities of either 
0.91 ms 3 fts or 2.44 ms 8 fts the latter being 
  The  smaller  Bundesanstalt  fr 
Materialprfung BAM machine is capable of an 
applied  load  of  36  kgf  onto  a  porcelain  peg  that 
slides  across  a  porcelain  anvil  at  a  peak  sliding 
velocity of only 0.074 ms.  These machines pinch 
the 35 to 45 mg sample between hard surfaces one 
of which is curved at unknown pressures probably 
exceeding a GPa without any lateral confinement 
of  the  sample  that  is  free  to  extrude  out.    This 
pinching  process  with  crushing  of  crystals  is  different  than  sliding  the  explosive  along  the  case 
wall during warhead penetration.  
There are some tests of larger scale with one 
friction surface but these dont replicate the conditions in a penetrating warhead.  Dyer and Taylor1 
had an apparatus that pressed a 25.4 mm cube of 
explosive  at  0.69  to  50.3  MPa  against  a  friction 
surface that slides for 10 ms at a constant velocity 
of 1.5 to 6.0 ms. This test apparatus was adapted 
by Peterson et al2 for use on different explosives.  
Dickson et al.3 pressed a 10-mm diameter sample 
at up to 5.7 MPa against a disk rotating at 2.5 to 15 
ms. The skid test first mentioned in reference 4 
has a hemisphere of 11.3 kg or more on the end of 
a pendulum that contacts an anvil usually at 45.   
The Intense Pressure and Friction Test IPFT4 
attempts to replicate the conditions within a penetration  warhead  on  a  50.8-mm  diameter  by  50.8mm  long  sample  in  a  steel  cylinder.    Pistons  are 
placed  at  each  end  of  the  cylinder  one  of  which 
receives  an  input  from  a  gun-launched  projectile 
and  the  other  dampens  the  transmitted  motion 
which pressurizes the sample.  At sliding velocities 
of about 50 ms the radial pressure applied by the 
sample on the wall varied from 960 MPa near the 
input  piston  to  130  MPa  near  the  output  piston. 
This  is  a  field  test  for  validating  survivability  of 
explosives but too expensive for screening candidates. 
Experimental Arrangement 
The current arrangement was designed to provide uniform and realistic conditions for screening 
candidate  explosive  formulations  in  penetrating 
warheads.    The  cross-sectional  view  of  the  test 
section in Figure 1a was derived from the NSWC 
Setback  Simulator5  and  similarly  bolted  between 
two  25.4-mm  thick  steel  plates.    Two  cylindrical 
samples H usually from different explosives are 
hydraulically loaded F up to 70 MPa by a small 
piston  G  against  opposing  sides  of  a  moving 
friction surface E.  Normal stress at the friction 
surface is independent of sliding velocity. 
Each sample is 12.7-mm diameter 1.27 cm2 
by  6.4-mm  thick  and  is  within  a  ring  I  of 
polytetrafluoroethylene 
friction  and  prevent  the  sample  from  extruding 
between the friction surface and confinement tube 
J.  PTFE was chosen because of its low friction 
coefficient with steel and its mechanical properties 
being  similar  to  most  explosives.    The  friction 
surface was driven up to greater than 100 ms by a 
powder  charge  C  whose  products  are  vented 
through holes K in the confinement tube which 
are uncovered by the passing of the driving piston 
E.  The friction surface was then decelerated by 
deformation  of  a  PTFE  bumper  L  in  the  cavity 
below.  The increasing and then decreasing sliding 
velocity  represents  the  compression  and  rebound 
of an explosive fill during rapid deceleration. 
When  the  friction  surface  of  1144  steel  was 
smooth in the initial tests even the most sensitive 
samples would not react.  The following data were 
obtained  after  roughening  the  friction  surface  as 
shown  in  Figure  1b  by  pressing  it  between  two 
hardened  steel  files.    The  tiny  indentations  from 
this  process  are  on  average  357  by  123  micron 
with a spacing of 1.03 by 1.17 mm.  Rows of indentations  in  the  direction  of  travel  are  not 
orthogonal to the other rows but at an angle of 53 
as indicated by the dashed line in Figure 1b.  Sample outlines at the beginning and end of each test 
corresponding to an 18-mm length of travel are 
also shown in Figure 1b. 
Pressure  and  displacements  were  collected 
during each experiment.   The pressure driving the 
friction  surface  was  recorded  to  guide  selecting 
powder loads for different sliding velocities.  Both 
samples  were  equally  loaded  by  a  quasi-steady 
hydraulic pressure and recorded at the time of the 
test.  Motion  of  the  friction  surface  was  seen 
through an opening in the confinement tube which 
was  illuminated  for  photography  with  high-speed 
video.    The  displacement  of  scribe  lines  on  the 
edge  of  the  friction  surface  from  the  video  was 
converted  to  velocity  which  increases  to  a  peak 
and then slows much as it would during a warhead 
penetration.    Data  collected  during  a  typical  experiment  are  shown  in  Figure  2.    Hereafter  only 
the peak velocity is reported. 
C  Propelling Powder 
J  Confinement Tube 
K  Vents for Powder 
Figure 1a. Sketch of sliding friction apparatus and 1b. Photograph of friction surface E rotated 90 
Figure  2  Data  captured  from  an  experiment.   
One  of  the  samples  did  react  in  this  experiment.  
The  vertical  axis  shows  pressure  MPa  red  and 
blue  traces  position  mm  orange  trace  and 
velocity ms green trace. 
Explosive Formulations 
Tests  were  performed  on  both  pressed  and 
cast-cured  high  explosives. 
explosives had a single energetic ingredient either 
135-triamino-256-trinitrobenzene 
Explosive  A  or  LLM-105  in  Explosive  B  and  a 
binder.    Another  pressed  composition  Explosive 
C  contained  3-nitro-124-triazol-5-one  NTO 
octahydro-1357-tetranitro-1357-tetrazocine 
remaining  four  were  cast-cure  compositions  with 
ammonium  perchlorate 
oxidizing  the  Al.  These  compositions  contained 
energetic  crystals  135-trinitroperhydro-135triazine RDX in Explosive D HMX in Explosive 
E  and  Explosive  F  and  both  NTO  and  HMX  in 
Explosive  G.    The  general  compositions  of  the 
formulations are summarized in Table 1.  The AP 
particle  sizes  used  in  Explosives  E  F  and  G  are 
smaller  than  that  used  in  Explosive  D.    A  larger 
particle  size  distribution 
Approved for Public Release Distribution is Unlimited 
Table 1 Compositions of Explosives 
Explosive  Energetic 
Results and Discussion 
Sliding  velocity  was  varied 
threshold between a reaction GO and no reaction 
NOGO  based  on  mass  loss  greater  than  50 
with reaction versus less than 1 with no reaction.  
No  samples  had  a  mass  loss  between  these 
percentages.    Ancillary  evidence  of  reaction  was 
smoke  on  the  high-speed  video  a  rise  in  the 
hydraulic pressure on the samples both shown in 
Figure  2  and  burn  marks  on  the  friction  surface.  
The  circled  area  in  Figure  3  is  the  burned  region 
on the friction surface from a GO for Explosive D.  
Figure 3 Pictures of the friction surface post-test. 
A GO with Explosive D is on the top and a NOGO 
with Explosive F is on the bottom. 
Also shown is the friction surface for a NOGO on 
the  bottom.    Smoke  was  observed  at  or  near  the 
end of movement of the friction surface for  most 
GOs.  Reaction was achieved in a few samples but 
only  at  the  highest  sample  pressures  tested  66 
GOs  and  NOGOs  for  all  compositions  are 
displayed  in  Figure  4  on  a  plot  of  peak  sliding 
velocity  versus  sample  pressure  when  near  66 
MPa.  Sample pressures ranged from 63 to 69 MPa 
at  the  time  of  each  test  so  Figure  4  primarily 
shows  the  effect  of  sliding  velocity.    Note  that 
formulations  with  just  an  insensitive  energetic 
ingredient were not able to be ignited.  Since the 
energy dissipated by friction is proportional to the 
product of the sample pressure P and the sliding 
velocity  V  this  is  used  in  Figure  5  to  rank  the 
for  each  composition.  
Multiplying  P  and  V  by  the  sample  area  and  the 
coefficient of friction which is not known would 
be the actual energy dissipated.   
Figure  4  Chart  of  experiments  at  66  MPa  and 
varying sliding velocities.  Points with orange fill 
or  background  are  GOs.    Data  are  offset  -  1.5 
when  the  amount  of  heat  generated  exceeds  that 
which  can  be  conducted  away. 
confinement  of  the  sample  promotes  the  reaction 
by not allowing any reaction products to vent.   
The relative rankings obtained with the sliding 
friction  apparatus  are  compared  with  those  from 
the BAM small-scale safety test in Table 2.  The 
data  from  the  BAM  test  are  not  from  the  exact 
same explosive sample and were conducted at two 
different  laboratories  but  this  is  not  expected  to 
change  the  ranking.    Only  Explosive  G  is  out  of 
place  in  the  ranking  shifting  towards  higher 
in  our  sliding  friction  apparatus 
possibly  because  of 
the  uncured  binder  as 
described previously. 
Figure  5  GO-NOGO  plot  of  friction  sensitivity.  
Explosives are ordered from the least sensitive at 
the top to the most sensitive at the bottom.   
The  samples  with  the  highest  sensitivity  all 
two  particle  sizes 
investigated  sensitivity  increased  for  the  larger 
inconsistent  reaction  of 
Explosive  D  is  likely  because  of  the  varying  AP 
particle  sizes  present  at  the  friction  surface  with 
the  larger  particles  having  a  greater  ignition 
tendency.    The  results  also  trend  with  the  weight 
percent  of  AP  in  the  formulation  with  the 
exception  of  Explosive  G. 
containing  NTO  Explosive  G  has  a  different 
binder  system  than  the  other  AP  containing 
explosives  and  had  failed  to  cure  fully  before 
testing because of binder chemistry.  When under 
pressure  the  uncured  binder  in  Explosive  G  was 
flowing away from crystals on the friction surface 
which  probably  contributed  to  a  higher  than 
expected friction sensitivity. 
Every time the ancillary evidence for reaction 
indicated that it occurred near the end of the stroke 
of the friction surface or after it had stopped.  Hot 
spots  are  created  as  the  sample  slides  across  the 
friction  surface  but  are  also  being  quenched  by 
continual  exposure  to  a  cooler  section  of  the 
friction surface.  However at the end of the stroke 
the  hot  spots  are  allowed  to  sit  and  cook  in  one 
position  on  the  friction  surface.    Reaction  occurs 
Table  2  Comparison  of  handling  sensitivity 
results with our sliding friction apparaus 
A  B  G  C  E  F  D 
A  B  C  E  G  F  D 
The  small-scale  apparatus  presented  here 
provides  conditions  close 
explosive fill in a warhead as it penetrates a target.  
The  sample  is  fully  confined  against  one  hard 
surface much like it is in the warhead whereas it 
is pinched between two hard surfaces in the ABL 
sensitivity  ranking  for  the  present  apparatus  has 
similarities  to  that  for  the  smaller  samples  in  the 
BAM safety test suggesting it is a useful starting 
point  in  formulation  development.    The  larger 
sample  in  the  present  apparatus  although  still  a 
laboratory-scale test exhibited a wide GONOGO 
range  for  Explosive  D  probably  because  its  AP 
particle size is greater than for other formulations.  
Reducing  the  AP  particle  size  not  only  increased 
the reaction threshold but also produced a distinct 
threshold  which  provides  more  confidence  for 
surviving  a  penetration  event.    Both  energetic 
ingredients  and  mechanical  properties  of  the 
formulation contribute to friction sensitivity.  The 
Symposium ONR 333-05-02 San Diego CA 
5. Sandusky H. W. Granholm R. H. and Felts J. 
E. Reaction of Explosives Containing Cavities 
from Compressive Loads 25th JANNAF 
Propulsion Systems Hazards Subcommittee 
Meeting CPIAC JSC CD-60 Dec 2009. 
Matt Holmes WX-6 LANL 
Is  it  possible  that  the  ignition  mechanism  is 
viscoplastic  shear  heating  rather  than  frictional 
heating?  Does  the  experimental  geometry  permit 
Reply by Joshua Felts 
Frictional heating is a subset of viscoplastic shear 
heating.    In  this  experiment  the  asperities  on  the 
friction surface can create a boundary layer in the 
sample where viscoplastic shear heating can occur. 
Christelle Collet Herakles 
AL  and  AP  are  known  to  be  very  sensitive  at 
small-scale friction test BAM friction test. As a 
consequence  it  would  be  interesting  to  conclude 
about  the  sensitivity  of  the  APAl  mixture  to  the 
sliding  test  instead  of  concluding  with  AP  effect 
Reply by Harold Sandusky 
formulations  with  and  without  Al  were  made 
however Explosive C with Al but no AP was less 
sensitive than Explosives D E F  G with both 
Al and AP.  In those latter explosives there were 
energetic ingredients and binder that the AP could 
oxidize in addition to the Al thus the Al may not 
Randall Simpson LLNL 
demonstrated  the  effect  of  an  uncured  binder  in 
Explosive G which was not detected by the BAM 
test.  In future work consistency of results will be 
verified  for  different  batches  of  sample  and 
samples  of  completely  different  formulations will 
be  investigated.    Furthermore  sensitivity  will  be 
predictions  of  survivability  validated  in  full-scale 
Microwave-Induced Fast Thermal Decomposition of HMX 
Amanda L. Duque and W. Lee Perry 
Weapons Experiments Division 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 
Abstract. Microwave radiation was used to rapidly and volumetrically heat HMX to the 
point of ignition on a fast timescale less than 1 second.  While the original intent was to 
use this data to validate thermal decomposition models in a fast kinetic regime that has 
been  sparsely  investigated  new  phenomena  were  revealed.  Repeated  observations  of 
lower than predicted temperature at the point of ignition were explained by the formation 
of  a  plasma  as  a  result  of  interaction  of  electromagnetic  fields  with  gas  phase 
decomposition products. While the details of the mechanism continue to be explored we 
hypothesize  that  energy  is  transferred  from  the  electromagnetic  waves  to  radicals  and 
charged species in the gas phase which result in enhanced kinetics. 
Energetic nitramines are an important class of 
military  explosives  and  propellants  that  includes 
RDX  and  HMX.  Energetic  materials  are  used  in 
vast  quantities  109  kgyr  for  mining  and 
demolition operations relatively smaller quantities 
for military uses and very small quantities are used 
in  nuclear  weapons  and  improvised  explosive 
devices. The accidental or intentional initiation of 
any explosive or propellant occurs when a critical 
quantity of energy is deposited in a critical volume 
of  material  at  a  sufficient  rate  to  overcome  heat 
losses.  Sources  of  heat  include  impact  spark 
friction  shock  and  boundary  heat  e.g.  fire. 
fundamental  physical  and 
chemical  processes  allow  us  to  better  control  the 
safety  and  use  of  these  ubiquitous  materials.  We 
understanding of a wide range of materials to the 
common ignition stimuli but have an accurate and 
detailed physio-chemical understanding of perhaps 
only  one  energetic  molecule  HMX1-4  due  to  its 
widespread  use.  Years  of  research  have  revealed 
evidence of four distinct reaction steps including a 
solid  state  phase  transition  and  sublimation  that 
occurs  through  a  quasi-melt  phase.5  Significant 
data  exist  to  validate  this  reaction  mechanism  for 
conditions  of  slow  boundary  heating.6  However 
little validation exists for the fast heating regimes 
10-3  s  due  to  the  difficulty  of  making  reliable 
temperature measurements on short time scales in 
the presence of large temperature gradients this is 
a  problem  that  exists  for  probing  any  solid-  or 
liquid-state  chemical  reaction  mechanism  having 
significant heat producing or consuming steps. It is 
our  goal  to  provide  reliable  accurate  data  to 
validate these kinetics. 
We implemented microwave MW heating to 
access  this  time  scale.  The  MW  environment  is 
well  controlled  non-perturbing  and  not  transport 
limited i.e. the volumetric nature of MW heating 
minimizes  the  role  of  thermal  conduction  until 
ignition and allows extremely high heating rates 
minimal  temperature  gradients  and  short  ignition 
times.  This  method  contrasts  with  conventional 
methods  that  either  require  conduction-limited 
boundary  heating  or  mechanical  stimuli  which
Directional coupler 
TE-Cooled Amplified IR 
Figure 1.  a Overall experimental schematic for confined MW experiments b Top view of MW cavity 
diameter  85.5 mm sample diameter  5 mm c Side view of MW cavity height  19.1 mm 
results  in  difficult  to  observe  temperature  fields. 
We  have  previously  reported  the  MW-induced 
thermal  hot  spot  initiation  of  HMX  embedded 
inclusions of electromagnetically absorbing silicon 
carbide  were  used 
localization of hot spot formation and subsequent 
ignition.7  8  We  have  also  reported  MW-induced 
bulk heating to ignition of HMX-polymeric binder 
systems  doped  with  a  small  mass  fraction  1 
wt multiwalled carbon nanotubes or graphite to 
maximize  MW  absorption  in  the  samples.9  The 
carbon  nanotubes  may  perturb  the  -  phase 
transition  in  HMX  and  the  current  work  using 
neat  HMX  eliminates  this  possible  convolution. 
Recently  researchers  have  modeled  the  feasibility 
of heating neat explosives with MW absorption to 
the point of ignition in short time scales.10 
it has previously been shown that application of an 
electric  field  to  a  shocked  explosive  will  have  a 
quantifiable effect on the initiation and growth of 
detonation the presence of the electric field results 
in  faster  shock-to-detonation  transition  decreased 
increased  detonation 
Confined Microwave Experiment and Results 
Approximately 0.5 g of HMX powder Class 
5  fine  was  hand-pressed  into  a  quartz  sample 
tube  inner  diameter    5  mm  wall  thickness    1 
mm to a density of 1.43 gcc 75 TMD. The 
sample  was  packed  to  a  height  of  19.1  mm  also 
the  height  of  the  MW  cavity  described  below.  
The  top  and  bottom  of  the  sample  tube  which 
extended  through  either  side  of  the  cavity  were 
sealed with epoxy.  The sample tube was placed in 
the center of a coaxial cable-coupled single mode 
TM010  circular  resonant  cavity  of  diameter  85.5 
mm Figure 1 and height 19.1 mm. The aluminum 
cavity  was  excited  via  a  loop  coupler  magnetic 
field  coupling.  A  low  dielectric  constant  foam 
Although the original intent of this study was 
to  utilize  the  fast  uniform  heating  provided  by 
absorption  of  MW  energy 
decomposition  kinetics  of  HMX  in  these  time 
regimes  we  have  discovered  that  concentrated 
electromagnetic fields will interact with gas phase 
decomposition products to form a plasma.  In fact 
Figure 2.  a Representative heating to ignition results from confined microwave ignition experiments. The 
top right image is an enlarged region of the top left graph. b 3-D COMSOL model representation of the 
actual experimental set-up. The different colors represent temperature the image shown is one second 
before ignition. The max temperature yellow is 433 C the maroon color is room temperature. c 
Comparison of the heating behavior of the COMSOL model results with the actual experimental data. 
Rohacell 51 RIMA   1.01 filled the remaining 
volume  of  the  cavity  around  the  quartz  sample 
tube  to  minimize  arcing.  Nylon  or  brass  rods 
introduced on the outer circumference of the cavity 
allowed  fine-tuning  of 
the  cavity  resonance 
frequency to match the source 2.4595 GHz. The 
sample diameter was small compared to the cavity 
diameter  and  MW  wavelength  so  we  expect 
uniform  heating  due  to  negligible  electric  field 
gradients  across  the  sample  the  electric  field 
strength  follows  a  Bessel  function  with  the 
maximum  in  the  center  of  the  cavity.  The  Q  of 
this  structure  was  340  introducing  the  sample 
reduced  the  Q  to  approximately  290  such  that 
85 of the power was dissipated in the sample. 
forward  and  reflected  power  incident  on  and 
reflected  from  the  heating  fixture  Figure  1b-c.  
For  this  effort  we  must  accurately  measure  the 
temperature  of  the  sample  under  MW  exposure. 
Conventional methods for measuring temperature 
such  as  a  metal  thermocouple  will  perturb  the 
experiment  electromagnetically  and  may  not 
respond  on  a  fast  enough 
Calibrated  one  color 
pyrometery  provided  a  minimally  perturbing 
method. We used a silica fiber 600 m diameter 
NA    0.32  coupled  to  an  InGaAs  photodetector 
1200  2570 nm which provides good signal-tonoise above 80 C. The tip of the fiber probe was 
inserted  through  the  top  of  the  epoxy  plug  and 
extended  to  the  center  point  of  the  packed  HMX 
powder. We expect minimal temperature gradients 
at  the  HMX-quartz  interface  due  to  the  similar 
A  magnetron  system  provided  MW  power 
continuous or pulsed at a peak of 3 kW. Figure 
1a shows the schematic of the system. Directional 
coupler  crystal  detectors  bolometers  provided 
voltage-proportional  power  signals  to  measure 
 Perry 2010 impact friction
 Lengelle 1991 laser ignition
 Duque MW Experiments
Figure  3.  Microwave  ignition  experiments  show 
lower  than  expected  ignition  temperatures.  This 
plot  compares  the  data  collected  to  the  global 
decomposition  kinetics  proposed  by  Henson  as 
well  as  other  experimental  data  collected  in 
different time regimes. 
Unconfined Microwave Experiment and Results 
In order to confirm the ignition temperature in 
independent  temperature  verification  method  the 
experimental arrangement was modified so the top 
surface  could  be  viewed  with  an  infrared  camera 
FLIR SC6000 MWIR.  Approximately 0.5 grams 
of  fine  HMX  powder  was  hand-pressed  in  the 
center  of  a  Teflon  block 
approximately 75 TMD. The sample holder fits 
inside  a  WR-284  waveguide  the  center  of  the 
Teflon  block  contains  an  opening  for  the  sample 
which is aligned with a 0.25 diameter opening in 
the top of a straight piece of waveguide.  Through 
this  opening  the  top  surface  of  the  HMX  was 
viewable  by  the  infrared  camera.  The  IR  fiber 
probe was also embedded in the volumetric center 
of  the  sample.  In  these  experiments  MW  energy 
was  applied  in  pulses  3  kW  peak  power  at  250 
Hz at a 25 duty cycle 1 ms pulse width. Pulse 
width  modulation  of  the  MW  power  suppresses 
localized heating and thermal runaway. 
As  shown  in  Figure  4  ignition  events  were 
also  observed.  However  the  HMX  was  not 
consequently the quartz will heat at approximately 
the same rate as the HMX.13 
The  COMSOL  multiphysics  modeling 
platform  provided  the  means  for  computing  the 
system  behavior  predicted  by  the  established 
kinetic  model  while 
environment  that  results  from  MW  heating.  The 
the  4-step  reversible  kinetics  and 
associated rate equations for HMX and how they 
are  used  in  COMSOL  modeling  have  been 
covered in a previous publication.14 The model is a 
2-D  axisymmetric  representation  of  the  system 
including  dimensions  and  all 
electromagnetic  properties.  The  model  results 
Figure  2b-c  highlight  the  uniform  temperature 
distribution within the sample. 
A representative data set is shown in Figure 2a 
for  the  absorbed  MW  power  dashed  black  trace 
and  temperature  recorded  by  the  IR  fiber  probe 
solid red trace during a typical experiment. MW 
energy  was  applied  in  one  continuous  pulse.  For 
consistency  and  comparison  with  published 
behavior  and  our  validation  model  we  are  only 
concerned  with  the  temperature  just  prior  to 
explosion  and  the  induction  time.  As  seen  in 
Figure 2a the ignition event begins at 423 ms into 
the  experiment  at  a  recorded  temperature  of 
approximately  160  C.  Under  these  experimental 
corresponding  to  ignition  and  the  HMX  was 
completely consumed.  
Figure  2c  compares  the  COMSOL  model 
heating  results  based  on  the  accepted  4-step 
decomposition kinetics of HMX and experimental 
data. It is evident there is a large discrepancy in the 
expected  temperature  rise  predicted  by  the  model 
and that observed in the experiment.  The ignition 
considerably  higher 
experimentally  350  C  vs  160  C.  Figure  3 
compares the kinetic calculations and experimental 
data  with  previous  HMX  ignition  data  from 
different experiments in a similar time regime.8 15 
Also included on the plot are predictions from the 
  The  data  collected  from  MW 
ignition  experiments  highlighted  oval  do  not 
follow  the  expected  ignition  time-temperature 
for  much  higher  and 
 IR Temperature Probe
 IR Temperature Probe
Figure 4.  a Representative results from unconfined microwave ignition experiments. The top right image 
is an enlarged region of the top left graph. b Infrared camera images of the progression of the reaction. 
experiments.  Interestingly  initial  ignition  events 
were  observed  before  the  sample  began  bulk 
heating  at  least  within  the  detection  limit  of  the 
InGaAs detector. Bulk heating is observed at the 
end of the MW pulse sequence see solid trace at 
3.0 s in Fig 4a but light events did occur prior to 
this  recorded  heating.    Furthermore  the  infrared 
camera  data  Figure  4b  corroborates  the  ignition 
arrangement. A maximum temperature of 205 C 
was measured which is still lower than predicted 
by the accepted HMX decomposition kinetics.  
electromagnetic waves to free electrons which will 
enhance  the  reaction  kinetics.  Simple  Newtonian 
analysis  of  the  velocity  and  displacement  of  a 
small charged molecular fragment indicates that a 
reasonably strong electromagnetic field can add on 
the order of 100 K within an oscillation amplitude 
of 10s of nanometers. The electronically-activated 
molecules require less energy to react and a lower 
is  observed  with  MW 
heating.16 This is related to previous observations 
that  electric  fields  will  have  a  quantifiable  effect 
on  the  initiation  and  growth  of  detonation  of  a 
shocked  explosive.11  Experimental  evidence  has 
shown that this alters the chemical kinetic pathway 
the  explosive  molecules  andor 
intermediates  to  higher  energy  electronic  states 
this  in  turn  increases  the  reaction  rate  of  the 
decomposition chain reactions.12 
in  plasmaassisted  ignition.16  The  sublimation  of  HMX  and 
presence  of  free  radicals  and  electrons  in  the  gas 
phase17  allows  energy  transfer  to  occur  from 
Directional coupler 
fwd  ref power sensors 
Figure 5.  Schematic of coupled laser-MW experimental setup. 
Coupled  Laser-Microwave  Experiment  and 
To  test  the  hypothesis  stated  in  the  previous 
section  we  coupled  the  MW  source  and  the 
unconfined  waveguide  apparatus  with  a  laser 
ignition source. The advantage of this arrangement 
is  to  utilize  the  fast  deposition  of  thermal  energy 
from a source other than MWs to rapidly heat the 
surface and promote formation of gas-phase HMX.  
We  employed  a  250  W  CO2  laser  Coherent 
model GEM-200PC operating at a wavelength of 
10.6  m  and  maximum  power.  A  photodiode 
Thorlabs  Model  DET210  was  positioned  to 
detect  visible  light  emission  above  the  pellet 
surface  for  first  light  measurement.  This  series 
of  experiments  utilized  pressed  cylindrical  pellets 
of  neat  HMX  0.25  diameter  96  TMD.  A 
schematic of this setup is shown in Figure 5. 
ignition  of  HMX  has  been 
previously  studied18  19  and  we  know  that  the 
formation  of  gas-phase  reactants  is  necessary  for 
ignition.  Therefore  it  follows  that  perturbation  or 
enhancement  of  the  energy  deposited  in  the  gas 
phase will affect the observed ignition behavior.  
We  observed  typical  ignition  behavior  of 
HMX  in  our  experimental  setup  using  the  laser 
only light events observed between 10  30 ms.18 
The  heating  and  ignition  behavior  was  recorded 
with the IR as well as the visible light photodiodes.  
MW-only  control  experiments  were  performed  at 
conditions  known  to  not  result  in  bulk  heating  of 
the  sample  10  ms  continuous  exposure  and  we 
confirmed  these  MW  exposure  conditions  had  no 
heat  or  light  effect  on  the  sample.  In  the  coupled 
laser-MW experiments the applied laser pulse was 
sufficient to heat the sample and begin the process 
of ignition. If our hypothesis is correct once HMX 
is  heated  to  the  point  where  sublimation  begins 
approx.  150  C  as  calculated  by  the  vapor 
pressure20  sufficient  gas-phase  species  will  exist 
to interact with the strong electromagnetic field. 
the  sample  during 
ignition  events  shown 
Indeed  we  observed  dramatic 
behavior  and plasma formation  when the laser 
pulse was followed by a short dose 10 ms of MW 
energy.  IR  and  visible  light  photodiodes  were 
incorporated to measure the first instance of light 
formation as well as compare the heating rate IR 
irradiation  as  well  as  when  MWs  were  applied 
Figure 6. High-speed video of the ignition events 
was also acquired Figure 7. Selected still images 
from the video and integrated intensities measured 
demonstrate  a  clear  difference  between  the  flame 
developments.  In  the  laser-only  case  the  flame 
development  is  gradual  the  build  up  in  the  gasphase  is  apparent.  The  plasma  formed  when  the 
MW  pulse  is  applied  is  abrupt  darkness  to 
extremely  hot  purple-white  light  in  one  frame 
separated  by  0.45  ms.  The  color  and  intensity 
difference  between  the  flames  in  the  two  cases 
imply  that  the  MW-plasma  spark  produced  is 
considerably  higher  in  temperature.  The  dramatic 
increase  in  heating  rate  observed  when  the  MW 
pulse begins Figure 6 is indicative of a nonlinear 
heating  process.  Other  processes  appear  to  be 
dominating  the  ignition  behavior  namely  MWinduced plasma formation.16  
 Visible Light Photodiode
Figure 6. IR and visible light diode responses during a representative coupled laser-MW experiment. 
Figure 7. High speed video of a laser only a and coupled laser-MW b experiment with pressed HMX. 
The graph right compares the integrated intensity of the video-produced images as a function of time. 
Although  volumetric  heating 
absorption  was  originally 
promising  experimental  method 
interrogation of fast ignition time parameter space 
we  have  uncovered  an  interesting  behavior  of 
energetic  materials.  When  a  heated  energetic 
material  in this case HMX  begins to sublime 
the  material  undergoes  premature  ignition  lower 
bulk temperature than predicted when exposed to 
electromagnetic  radiation.  It  is  our  belief  that 
energy  is  transferred  from  the  electromagnetic 
waves  to  radicals  and  charged  species  in  the  gas 
phase  which  result  in  plasma  formation.  The 
details of this mechanism continue to be explored. 
Early  results  on  other  materials  RDX  sugar 
Teflon reveal that this behavior may be unique to 
energetic  materials  as  similar  observations  were 
not seen in inert sugar and Teflon samples. There 
have  been  previous  studies  that  show  strong 
electric  fields  will  affect  the  shock  initiation  and 
detonation  wave  propagation  of  solid  high 
explosives11  12  21  22 and we intend to extend our 
experimental observations into this regime as well. 
We  appreciate  the  support  of  the  Joint  DoDDOE  Munitions  Program.  We  also  appreciate 
many  helpful  discussions  and  the  insight  of  Dr. 
Bryan  Henson  and  Dr.  Laura  Smilowitz  of  Los 
Alamos National Laboratory.    LA-UR-14-24809 Analysis of Shock and Jet Initiation Tests of High Explosives 
Werner Arnold Ernst Rottenkolber Thomas Hartmann 
MBDA-TDW Gesellschaft fr verteidigungstechnische Wirksysteme mbH Hagenauer Forst 
D-86529 Schrobenhausen Germany 
NUMERICS GmbH Mozartring 6 D-85238 Petershausen Germany 
Abstract.  The  initiation  of  two  variants  of  the  plastic  bonded  explosive  KS32 
HMXHTPB 8515   1.64 gcc was thoroughly studied. As for practical applications 
usually  different  methods  to  characterize  initiation  sensitivity  are  of  interest.  Here  the 
shock  sensitivity  and  the  sensitivity  against  shaped  charge  jet  impact  SCJI  were 
investigated.  The  outcomes  of  both  experimental  series  are  presented  and  qualitatively 
compared  to  each  other.  Additionally  the  results  of  a  new  trajectory  model  for  the 
reconstruction of the detonation fronts inside the charge is described and compared to a 
simpler VIP model. Finally attempts were made to calibrate a numerical initiation model 
to the experimental outcomes. 
explosives  by  shock  or  projectile  impact  depends 
not only on their formulation but also on the very 
details  of  their  fabrication.  Amongst  others  the 
quality  of  HMX  grains  obtained  from  different 
suppliers  may  be  different  and  with  respect  to 
initiation  otherwise  identical  explosives  made 
with  different  grains  are  expected  to  behave 
Recently  it  was  of  interest  to  study  the 
influence of HMX grain qualities HMX from two 
different  suppliers  on  the  sensitivity  of  the  PBX 
KS32  HMXHTPB  8515      1.64  gcc.  The 
standard shock sensitivity test for high explosives 
is the well-known gap test. Therefore the initiation 
sensitivity  of  KS32  samples  with  the  different 
HMX-grains  was  investigated  with  our  modified 
TDW gap test. For real applications in munitions 
however  STANAG  safety  tests  e.g.  fragment 
impact  FI  or  shaped  charge  jet  impact  SCJI  are 
equally important. Hence for a more fundamental 
understanding  of  the  initiation  phenomenology 
caused by such a SCJI another test setup which is 
rather comparable to the gap test was used. 
In  the  following  sections  the  test  setups  and 
experimental outcomes will be presented in detail. 
Additionally a new trajectory model to reconstruct 
the  detonation  fronts  inside  the  charge  is  used  to 
further evaluate the test results and the advantages 
of the model are highlighted by a comparison with 
the  simpler  VIP  model.  Finally  some  aspects  of 
the  accompanying  numerical  simulations  will  be 
Experimental Test Setups 
TDW Modified Gap Test 
The  appropriate  test  for  the  measurement  of 
shock  sensitivity  is  a  gap  test.  We  are  using  a 
somewhat  modified  TDW gap test as sketched in 
Figure  1  which  has  already  been  applied  in 
several  previous  investigations.1-3  The  donor  part 
comprises a Tetryl charge and a PMMA disk with 
varying  thickness  P  thus  tailoring  the  pressure  at 
the  end  of  the  PMMA  gap  pgap  as  required.  The 
necessary  calibration  curve  gap  thickness  P  vs. 
gap  pressure  at  exit  side  pgap  is  available.  The 
acceptor  part  consists  of  the  test  sample  with  58 
mm  diameter  and  50  mm  length    for  the  tests 
presented here a KS32 sample. A rotating mirror 
camera  is  used  to  measure  the  run  distance  to 
detonation s in streak mode the dashed lines in 
Figure  1  indicate  the  streak  slit.  An  additional 
metal plate is used to witness the caused dent. The 
required  flash  backlighting  is  delivered  by  a 
simultaneously  shock  compressed  Argon  gas 
volume  rubber  balloon  with  small  HE  charge  in 
contact behind the setup. 
v2d v  jet velocity and d  jet diameter behind 
the  steel  block  was  tailored  to  the  experimental 
needs. Also here a calibration curve stimulus S  
v2d  vs.  steel  thickness  P  was  elaborated  in  the 
Again  a  rotating  mirror  camera  was  used  to 
measure  the  breakthrough  signal  of  the  emerging 
and  evolving  detonation  front.  For  reasons  of 
comparability  with  tests  done  in  the  past4-8  the 
diameter  was  48  mm.  The  length  of  the  sample 
was  100  mm  or  200  mm  respectively.  A  steel 
block  stops  the  residual  SCJ  and  serves  as  a 
residual  performance  witness  plate  at  the  same 
Fig. 2. Test setup for the SCJ impact. 
Both setups are equal in that they utilize bare 
charges  and  measure  streak  records  of 
detonation front breakthrough at the surface of the 
cylindrical  samples.  The  evaluation  of 
breakthrough  as  a  function  of  the  axial  position 
and  time  then  permits  a  correlation  of  the  run 
distance to detonation  s with the shock strength 
pgap or the SCJ stimulus v2d respectively. A typical 
example  of  such  a  streak  record  is  presented  in 
Figure  3.  In  addition  to  the  first  breakthrough 
the  forward  detonation  front  can  be 
Fig.  3.  Typical  streak  record  of  a  rotating  mirror 
camera from a SCJI test. 
Fig. 1. TDW modified gap test setup. 
Shaped Charge Jet Impact 
An analogous test setup for the SCJI initiation 
is sketched in Figure 2. Also with this setup many 
tests  have  already  been  conducted  in  the  past  to 
phenomenology  of  charges  when  attacked  by  a 
SCJ.4-8 Here the donor part consists of a SC with a 
caliber of 75 mm which is mounted at a standoff 
of 150 mm 2 Cal. to a steel barrier with varying 
thickness P. By the variation of P the stimulus S  
Evaluation Technique and Test Results 
Evaluation Technique 
For  the  evaluation  of  the  measured  streak 
Detection  in  Images9  was  developed  applying  a 
grey scale method to identify edges  in this case 
the  breakthrough  signals  as  demonstrated  in 
Figure 3.  The first breakthrough signal  marks the 
run distance to detonation s and is automatically 
evaluated by the EDI software. As described later 
this  technique  will be extended to also  utilize the 
forward  and  rearward  running  detonation  to 
reconstruct the detonation process with a trajectory 
The  gap  test  results  for  KS32  with  the  two 
different  HMX  grain  qualities  are  presented  in 
Figure 4. For large gap pressures beyond about 4.5 
GPa  no  differences  in  the  initiation  behavior  of 
two  charges  can  be  observed.  The  run 
distances  s  for  both  are  within  a  10  mm  range. 
With decreasing gap pressures however these run 
distances  are  quickly  growing  larger  and  the 
curves  for  the  two  HMX  grain  qualities  are 
separating  clearly.  At  about  3  GPa  the  difference 
amounts  to  almost  a  factor  of  two  i.e.  the  HMX 
grain  quality  from  supplier  2  is  much  more 
insensitive than that from supplier 1. This is very 
important  in  the  sense  of  insensitivity  of  a  PBX 
here  KS32  and  corresponding  insensitivity  of 
munitions that are filled with this explosive.  
The results for the SCJI tests are illustrated in 
Figure 5. The arrows in the figure at run distances 
of  100  mm  and  200  mm  respectively  indicate 
tests  where  no  detonation  could  be  observed  so 
that  the  run  distance  was  presumably  longer  than 
the  test  sample.  In  previous  tests  the  acceptor 
sample length was 100 mm.78 To be able to better 
assess  the  trend  in  the  curvature  of  the  measured 
curves  the  sample  length  was  increased  to  200 
mm  for  the  less  sensitive  grain  quality  square 
Interestingly  enough  the  behavior  of  the  two 
KS32 samples when attacked by the SCJ is rather 
comparable to the gap test results of Figure 4. At 
high  stimuli  the  run  distance  is  very  similar  for 
both HMX qualities but with decreasing stimulus 
the  sample  with  HMX  from  supplier  1  behaves 
more  sensitive  i.e.  the  run  distances  are  shorter. 
Also the order of magnitudes of the differences in 
run  distance  between  the  two  HMX  qualities  is 
similar to that observed in the gap tests. 
Also  the  trends  in  the  curvature  are  rather 
similar for both test methods cf. Figure 4 and 5 a 
nonlinear rise to longer run distances to detonation 
s with reduced loading strengths gap pressure or 
SCJ stimulus respectively can be observed.  
This similarity was regarded as an interesting 
finding.  The  opportunity  was  used  to  further 
improving  our  existing 
evaluation models and techniques.   
Fig. 4. Results for gap tests. 
Fig. 5. Results for SCJI tests. 
Fig. 7. Distance a vs. steel barrier thickness P. 
difference  in  the  initiation  phenomenology  if  an 
air  gap  is  introduced  in  between  the  steel  barrier 
and the KS32 sample.7  
For  bare  charges  with  an  air  gap  the  SCJI 
always causes an impact initiation mode with a 
prompt initiation and theoretically no run distance 
to detonation. Ignoring the scattering in the graph 
the mean value is a  24 mm which is the radius 
of  the  charge.  Hence  there  is  a  rather  localized 
initiation in the middle of the charge. 
For  the  here  more  interesting  case  of  a 
covered charge without air gap the parameter a 
is decreasing with increasing barrier thickness i.e. 
reduced  stimulus  S.  A  decreasing  a  means  a 
growing VIP as sketched in Figure 8 which seems 
to be typical for a penetration initiation mode7 
The detonation emerges at the surface of a volume 
around  the  jet  tip  indicated  as  red  rectangles 
which increases with s. This phenomenon should 
be  investigated  in  more  detail  by  developing  the 
new  trajectory  model  which  is  presented  in  the 
following section.  
The  results  of  the  following  investigations 
were achieved with KS32 and HMX of supplier 2. 
The intention of these investigations was to obtain 
a  more  detailed  insight  in  the  initiation  process 
within the sample in a first step by deduction for 
the  experimental  results  and  in  a  second  step  by 
comparison  of  the  outcomes  of  step  one  with 
numerical  simulations  applying  a  reactive  burn 
Analytical Evaluation Models 
Analytical VIP Model  
The  VIP  virtual  initiation  point  VIP  or 
more  generally  spoken  an  initiation  plane  or 
volume model was already presented earlier8 and 
shall be only shortly repeated here.  
The  model  assumptions  are  sketched  and 
parameterized  in  Figure  6  showing  a  cut  through 
the  sample  2-dimensional  representative.  The 
graph indicates the possibility of an areal initiation 
and  a  subsequent  spherical  propagation  of  the 
detonation front. Detonation is assumed to start at 
time  t0  at  the  outmost  point  x0  y0  and  to 
propagate  along  the  vector  s  to  the  point  xt  r 
where  it  can  be  observed  by  the  camera.  The 
formulae  calculating  these  VIP  parameters  are 
derived and given in the original publication.8 
Fig. 6. Propagation of a spherical detonation wave 
starting from the edge of a virtual initiation plane 
with peripheral coordinate points x0 y0. 
The  distance  a  provides  a  measure  for  the 
radial  extension  of 
this  VIP  planevolume. 
Thereby  a  small  a  means  e.g.  a  large  VIP 
planevolume and vice versa. Figure 7 graphically 
evaluation of earlier tests with and without an air 
gap between the barrier and the acceptor charge.7  
Fig.  8.  Virtual  initiation  areasvolumes  indicated 
as red rectangles for penetration initiation mode.    
New Trajectory Model 
The  dimensions  of  the  VIP  planes    volumes 
indicated  as  red  rectangles  in  Figure  8  were 
determined  by  the  measured  run  distance  s  and 
the calculated distance a cf. Ref. 8. 
The  analytical  VIP  model  described  above  is 
showed  certainly  more 
interesting results which seemed to be worthwhile 
to further pursue and improve the model.  
In  an  earlier  PhD  thesis  written  at  TDW  a 
trajectory model was investigated.10 The method 
allows a look into the test sample by observing 
the detonation only at the sample surface.  
The  basic  idea  of  this  model  is  to  determine 
the propagation trajectories from the streak records 
as sketched in Figure  9. The calculated trajectory 
vectors  in  the  following  figures  in  blue  are 
perpendicular to the detonation wave front in red 
measured  on  the  sample  surface  by  the  streak 
camera.  Thus  it  is  possible  to  reconstruct  the 
propagation  and  likewise  the  structure  of  the 
detonation wave front. 
Using  the  basic  approach  of  this  model  the 
deduced formulae were implemented into our EDI 
software.  As  with  the  simpler  VIP  model  it  was 
again desired to find an apparent point  or more 
general  an  apparent  planevolume    of  initiation 
as already discussed in the previous section.  
trajectories  and  of 
Fig.  9.  Trajectory  method  reconstruction  of  a 
Application to Shaped Charge Jet Impact 
Figure  10  exemplarily 
detonation wave fronts for a SCJI experiment. For 
symmetry  reasons  the  graph  shows  only  the 
reconstruction  of  the  right  half  of  the  whole  test 
sample  D    48  mm  L    100  mm  with  the 
calculated trajectories blue and the reconstructed 
detonation front red. 
Fig. 10. Calculated trajectories straight blue lines 
and detonation wave fronts curved red lines for a 
typical SCJI test.  
It can be clearly seen how the detonation front 
emerges  from  the  middle  part  of  the  charge.  The 
VIP  is  not  localized  to  a  point  but  more  an 
initiation area in 2D or an initiation volume in 
3D which can be almost quantitatively described 
compared  to  the  more  qualitative  evaluation  in 
Figure 8. The lateral extension of this volume can 
very well be determined by the area of the crossing 
trajectories  in  combination  with  the  enveloping 
detonation wave front curves. 
In  a  further  step  the  variation  of  this  VIP 
volume  with  varying  SCJ  stimulus  i.e.  varying 
comparable to the procedure conducted in Figure 7 
and Figure 8 with the simple VIP model.   
With a reduction of the stimulus S   v2d not 
only  the  run  distance  to  detonation  s  increases 
Figure  5  but  also  the  lateral  extension  of  the 
initiation  volume  grows  Figure  7  and  8. 
Applying the trajectory model as shown in Figure 
trajectory  evaluation 
examples  for  the  SCJI  test  series  are  presented 
this becomes especially clear. Both the increase in 
run  distance  and  the  changes  in  the  initiation 
behavior i.e. the increase in the initiation volume 
can be observed very well. 
applying an energetic material model that allowed 
to  study  of  the  VIP  initiation  volume.  Thus  a 
comparison  with  the  experimental  results  was 
possible.  The  parameters  of  the  HVRB  History 
Variable  Reactive  Burn  model12  had  been 
calibrated  against 
initiation  and  detonation 
propagation  experiments  prior  to  the  studies.  By 
numerical  it  was  possible  to  investigate  the 
initiation behavior in more detail compared to the 
standard run distance method applied previously. 
Typical  results  for  a  SCJ  impact  test  are 
presented  in  Figure  13.  The  left  side  of  each 
picture  shows  a  plot  of  the  color  coded  burn 
fraction  of  the  energetic  material  dark  blue    0 
pink  1 whereas the right side represents a color 
coded pressure plot blue cid1561cid3cid142cid145cid153cid481cid3cid148cid135cid134 cid1561cid3cid138cid139cid137cid138cid4667.   
Fig.  11.  Trajectory 
reconstruction from tests with varying stimulus S. 
Reconstruction  only  of  the  one  half  of  the  test 
sample D  48 mm L  200 mm. 
From  the  trajectory  model  reconstruction  the 
lateral extension of the initiation volume could be 
quantitatively  determined.  The  results  of  this 
procedure are shown in Figure 12.  
Fig. 12. Distance  a vs. steel barrier thickness P 
with trajectory model.  
Numerical Simulation Model 
Numerical HVRB Model adapted to the SCJI trials 
The  tests  were  accompanied  by  numerical 
the  hydrocode  SPEED11 
Fig.  13.  Numerical  simulations  of  a  SCJI 
experiment with the HVRB model. 
The  left  picture  in  Figure  13  shows  the 
moment  when a reactive shock  builds  up in  front 
of  the  SCJ  long  after  the  primary  shock  initially 
caused by the penetrating SCJ. The following two 
pictures  then  illustrate  the  resulting  detonation 
wave that propagates faster than the SCJ. 
Fig.  14.  Comparison  of  SCJ  trajectory  model 
reconstruction with simulation with HVRB model.  
Figure  14  presents  a  comparison  of  the  VIP 
initiation volume evaluated with the new trajectory 
model and the simulation results with the energetic 
material model HVRB.  At least qualitatively good 
agreement  is  reached  between  experiment  and 
Application to the Modified Gap Test 
test  results.  Figure  15  shows 
The new trajectory method was also applied to 
reconstruction of one of the conducted gap tests. In 
contrary  to  the  SCJI  where  the  initiation  starts 
from a more localized spherical volume around the 
SCJ tip the initiation area in the gap test is more 
planar indicated by a dashed line. The marked 22 
mm indicate the run distance to detonation in this 
Fig. 15. Calculated trajectories straight lines and 
detonation  fronts  curved  lines  for  a  typical  gap 
Fig.  16.  Numerical  simulations  of  a  gap  test 
experiment with the HVRB model. 
Finally  Figure  16  shows  a  corresponding 
numerical simulation with the HVRB model also 
demonstrating a more planar initiation behavior.  
The  initiation  behavior  of  the  PBX  KS32 
HMXHTPB  8515      1.64  gcc  was 
comparable  SCJI  test.  Two  different  HMX  grain 
qualities  were  used  to  find  out  the  impact  on  the 
initiation  results.  With  both  test  setups  it  was 
possible  to  clearly  distinguish  between  the  two 
grain  qualities  regarding  their  sensitivity  towards 
respectively.  Moreover  both 
delivered qualitatively similar results.  
To gain more insight in some of the involved 
trajectory  model  was 
introduced  to  reconstruct  the  detonation  process 
inside  the  charge.  This  reconstruction  clearly 
confirmed  an  increasing  lateral  extension  of  the 
initiation  volume  with  decreasing  stimulus  of  the 
shaped  charge  jet  which  was  already  assumed  in 
earlier  investigations  based  on  a  simpler  VIP 
The  experimental  tests  were  accompanied  by 
numerical  simulations  with  the  energetic  material 
model  HVRB  which  permits  us  to  reproduce  the 
experiments at least qualitatively.  
The  authors  would 
BAAINBw  Team  K  1.2  at  Koblenz  for  funding Scaled Cylinder Test Experiments with Insensitive PBX 9502 Explosive
Shock and Detonation Physics Group
Weapons Experiments Division
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos New Mexico USA
Abstract. Five copper cylinder tests were performed with the insensitive explosive formulation PBX 9502. The tests spanned a range of sizes corresponding to scales of 0.25 0.50
and 2.00 relative to the conventional 25.4-mm-inner-diameter test. This scale variation allows evaluation of effect of charge scale on the energy release in insensitive explosives
which have longer reaction zone lengths than conventional high explosives. Wall velocity
histories allow measurement of the work available from the detonation products and ultimately support product equation-of-state development. We report the raw wall velocity
history records t analytical forms to this data and calculate the Gurney and kinetic-energy
history associated with the cylinder wall during expansion.
25.4-mm inner-diameter test geometry 2. This scaling was introduced to determine its effect on the
energy release associated with the multi-scale reaction zone length of PBX 9502 which is thought to
exhibit fast and slow reaction length scales of 0.2
mm and 1.5 mm respectively. Several aspects of
the wall velocity histories are presented and analyzed including early wall ringing associated with
the initial shock breakout the subsequent smooth
wall acceleration and the terminal velocity. The results are compared to previous tests and the effect of
scale is discussed. Gurney and kinetic-energy histories will also be reported. A separate work details
the product equation of state derivation from these
Experimental Details
The experimental geometry consisted a copper
tube supported by a Delrin and aluminum assem
Introduction
The detonation cylinder test is a standard high explosive performance diagnostic used to derive detonation product equation-of-state information 12.
Studies commonly use the velocity versus time history of the metal wall to quantify an explosives
product state capability to accelerate metal 3. The
cylinder test is also used to derive t parameters for
equation-of-state models 4.
the results of recently performed
cylinder tests with the insensitive explosive formulation PBX 9502 composed of 95 TATB explosive and 5 Kel-F 800 Polychlorotriuoroethylene binder polymer. Our cylinders were 0.25-
0.50- and 2.00-scaled designs of the conventional
Approved for unlimited release LA-UR-14-24823
Fig. 1. The cylinder test geometry.
Table 1. Scaled cylinder test dimensions. Measurement tolerance was 50 m. Standard test 25 mm
ID dimensions included in italics for reference.
bly as shown in Fig. 1. Cylinder tests are commonly performed with a standardized and scalable
range of dimensions that xes the ratio of the copper wall area to that of the explosive area across the
tube cross section as detailed in Table 1. In this geometry that ratio is 0.440. Under this constraint
any scaled variant is expected to yield identical wall
velocity versus time data when the time axis is normalized by the test scale assuming that the explosive
energy yield is invariant of scale.
When scale effects are not being measured most
tests are predominately elded at the 1.00 scale to
facilitate comparison with historic data. That said
the larger reaction zones and failure diameters associated with non-ideal explosive may necessitate
larger scales. Conversely some researchers often
eld smaller scales to accommodate limited budgets
or explosive load limits at test sites.
Each test utilized time-of-arrival pins to measure
the detonation velocity four PDV probes to measure
the cylinder wall motion a streak camera for front
shape measurement not discussed in the present
manuscript and a framing camera for images of
the cylinder wall expansion.
All cylinder tests dimensions were scaled from
the 1-in standard test 13 as detailed in Table 1. The
copper grade was C101 Oxygen-free copper with
a dead soft temper. Metallurgical analysis veried
the annealed state after machining 8-20 Rockwell F
hardness and measured grain sizes on the order of
50 m. Use of annealed copper is standard cylindertest practice to prevent premature wall rupture during expansion. Grain size analysis ensured that the
cylinder wall thickness t was composed of a sufcient number of grains at least 10 so that fracture
along single grain boundary would not necessarily
result in a macroscopic wall rupture.
The copper cylinders were lled with rightcircular cylinders of PBX 9502 explosive. PBX
9502 is an insensitive munition developed by the
US Department of Energy and is composed of 95
TATB explosive and 5 Kel-F 800 polymer binder.
PBX 9502 material used in this test series was cored
from a 254-mm-diameter  54-mm-long hydrostatically pressed billet of lot HOL88H891-008 prills.
It was necessary to machine the exible PBX
9502 cores in multiple segments in order to achieve
good dimensional tolerances. Thus the explosive
ll for each test was composed of a number of
pieces as given in Tab. 2. Finished dimensions and
Table 2. Explosive cylinder dimensions per test.
densities measured via immersion densitometry
for each segment are listed in Tables 35. Pieces
were located in each cylinder such that density increased in the direction of detonation propagation
with the lowest density segments adjacent to the
booster charge as indicated in the tables.
Due to machining tolerances annular voids on
the order of 20 10 and 50 m were present be
172
Table 3. 0.25-scale cylinder PBX 9502 densities.
Each part was 6.32  0.01 mm in diameter and
38.10  0.01 mm in length.
Table 5. 2.00-scale cylinder PBX 9502 densities.
Each part was 50.75  0.01 mm in diameter and
50.80  0.01 mm in length.
Table 4. 0.50-scale cylinder PBX 9502 densities.
Each part was 12.69  0.01 mm in diameter and
50.85  0.01 mm in length.
50.8 m-diameter 44 AWG shielded copper magnet wire that was located on the outer cylinder diameter. The wires were raised to an electrical potential
of 75.0 V through use of an RC circuit with the copper tube acting as ground. Arrival of the shock associated with the detonation wave at each wire drove
the cylinder wall through the wire shielding and allowed current to ow from the high-voltage wire to
ground resulting in a measured voltage drop across
the resistor in the RC circuit. Probes locations were
measured to within 30 m and the pin voltage was
sampled with a bandwidth of 1 GHz 5 GSs digitizer rate during each test.
Wall Motion Diagnostic
Photon Doppler Velocimetry PDV a heterodyne interferometry technique was used to measure
the wall motion during each experiment. Four collimated PDV probes with a 20-100 mm working distance and a with a spot size of less than 350 m. The
probes were spaced around the cylinder approximately 40 radially apart and aligned to measure
the cylinder wall motion at a distance that was 13 of
the total cylinder length from the breakout end. Two
of the probes were located normal to the cylinder
wall and the remaining two were located normal to
the estimated 7 cylinder wall angle occurring after
detonation passage. Each surface was sanded with
200-grit sandpaper and inspected for diffuse reectivity. For the 0.25 and 0.50-scale tests probes were
spaced 50 mm away from the cylinder wall. For the
2.00-scale tests probes were located 100 mm from
the wall. Additionally each assembly was designed
to ensure that nothing would interfere with the wall
tween the copper ID and explosive OD for the 0.25
0.50 and 2.00-scale tests respectively. These voids
were lled with Dow Corning Sylgard 184 Silicone
Elastomer to adhere the assembly together and also
to prevent product jetting ahead of the detonation.
For the larger-aspect-ratio 0.25-scale HE cylinders
each pellet typically exhibited an interference t at
one end and a free-running t at the other due to
exing during lathe machining. The smaller aspect
ratio explosive cylinders in the 0.50- and 2.00-scale
tests were much more uniform in their outer diameter and t quality.
Each test was boosted with an HMX-based PBX
9501 cylindrical pellet that was of comparable diameter to the explosive ll and with an aspect ratio
of unity. The 0.25-scale tests were initiated with
Teledyne RISI RP-2 detonators while the larger
tests were initiated with RP-1 detonators. The
booster and initiators were located outside of the
Detonation Time-of-Arrival Diagnostic
The propagation of the detonation front along the
axial length of each cylinder was measured using
22 equally spaced shorting wires. No wires were
placed within a length of two charge diameters of
the booster in order to allow the overdriven wave to
relax to a steady velocity. Each wire consisted of a
 Gibbs and Popolato 1980
 Catanach et al. 1999
 Pemberton et al. 2011
 Unconned DSD prediction
 Unconned Rate Stick
Fig. 2. Diameter effect data for unconned and copper conned PBX 9502 charges. Detonation velocities are not adjusted for density effects.
The present scaled cylinder test velocity data
agree well with the prior cylinder test work of Refs.
2 and 3. The data also lie above the unconned numerical prediction. This trend is consistent with the
understanding that the presence of the metal connement reduces the transverse ow expansion in
the reaction zone allowing more of the combustion
energy to drive the detonation shock. One of the
0.25-scale tests 025-1 does not follow this trend
and lies on the extrapolated DSD curve indicating
that there was insufcient connement between the
copper and the explosive. However the remaining 0.25-scale test 025-2 lies above the unconned
trend. Gaps on the order of the detonation reaction
zone length 100 m for PBX 9502 would result in
unconned detonation velocities.
A single 1.0-scale cylinder test and both 2.0-scale
cylinder tests of Ref. 6 are also seen to lie below the conned diameter effect trend. Surprisingly the 2.0-scale data from Ref. 6 lies below
the diameter-effect curve prediction for unconned
charges. These deviations from the trend may be
due to use of low-density charges or the presence of
an air-gap between the explosive and copper cylinder wall.
Framing Imaging Data
Framing images of the expanding cylinder in test
200-1 and 050-2 are shown in Figs. 3 and 4.
After transit of the detonation the cylinder wall
is accelerated radially outwards by the high pressure combustion products. Initially the wall experi
motion prior to impact of the cylinder wall onto the
probe. PDV data was recorded at a bandwidth of
20 GHz 50 GSs digitizer rate and reduced using a
32-bit Fourier window size and a 4096-bit window
Experimental Results
Measured Detonation Velocity
Detonation velocities were calculated from the
time-of-arrival diagnostic data by assuming a steady
axial wave velocity along the length of the charge.
Probes distances and trigger times were t to x and
A least-squares t was used to optimize the detonation velocity D and apparent initiation time t0.
The tted velocity results and standard error listed
as uncertainty are given in Tab. 6 for each test.
Both detonation velocities and standard error de
Table 6. Measured detonation phase velocities at
creased with charge diameter. Test 025-1 was found
to have the highest standard error 0.63 of D. For
all other tests the standard error was below 0.12
The observed diameter effect is shown in Fig. 2
as a function of the inverse charge radius for the
present data and previously published PBX 9502
cylinder test data from Refs. 2 3 and 6. Also
shown is a diameter effect curve for unconned
PBX 9502 rate sticks from the Detonation Shock
Dynamics mode for a PBX 9502 calibration 7 and
a single data point for an unconned 8.5-mmdiameter PBX 9502 rate stick performed by the author.
Fig. 3. Framing images of test 200-1 taken 8.75 s
Fig. 4. Framing images of test 050-2 taken 3.75 s
ences a rapid acceleration phase and has a concaveoutwards prole. After a duration of several microseconds specic values depend on the product
equilibrium time and cylinder wall thickness corresponding to 1020 mm of axial length in the framing image wall acceleration decreases signicantly
and approaches a steady-state velocity value V. At
this point the wall assumes a straight prole that is
angled away from the initial tube axis. With the assumption that the velocity vector of wall motion is
predominately radially outwards the instantaneous
wall angle w relative to the tube axis can be approximated by
Fig. 5. Velocity spectrogram for PDV4 from 025-2.
where Vr is the radial component of the wall velocity and D is the detonation velocity. In reality
the deforming wall also develops a small component of motion in the axial upstream direction which
is quantied in a separate work 5. However near the
end of the acceleration process the cylinder wall
by assuming a steady detonation velocity and neglecting the initial velocity transient.
range of wall and detonation velocities measured in
the present experiments w ranges from 10.8
11.1. Wall velocity proles are reported below.
Measured wall velocities
Examples of the wall motion measured by the
PDV probes are shown in velocity-time spectrograms in Figs. 57.
The PDV proles provide
increased resolution relative to the framing camera
data. All probe proles exhibit characteristically
similar features. The detonation is supersonic relative to the sound speed of the copper tube and drives
a shock wave into the wall. Upon initial shock
breakout the outer wall diameter discontinuously
accelerates the wall to approximately 0.9 mms.
The wall velocity then accelerates in an oscillatory
fashion rings-up for several microseconds as a
series of shocks and expansion fans equilibrate the
pressure across the inner and outer wall surfaces.
The amplitude of the ringing oscillations decreases
Fig. 6. Velocity spectrogram for PDV1 from 050-2.
over time as the cylinder expansion decreases the
product gas pressure. Eventually the product gas
pressure no longer exerts signicant force on the
cylinder and the wall velocity approaches a constant
value of V. For the present experiments V is approximately 1.5 mms.
At some point in the cylinder expansion process
the wall stretches and thins sufciently that it fails.
This rupture allows detonation products gases inside the cylinder to expand ahead of the wall. These
products can also carry fragments of the tube wall in
the product jet. On the PDV spectrograms this feature appears as a diffuse spray of energy covering
a wide  0.3 mms velocity range. The higher
velocities indicate product expansion on the probe
measurement axis while lower velocities may indicate slower moving material or expansion signicantly off of the measurement axis. Premature wall
failure and product venting will affect the wall ve
176
d5Rdt5t  0. The t does not capture the initial compressible ring-up behavior present when
the tube wall is driven supersonically.
smoothly averages through this acceleration regime.
Historically 2 radial cylinder wall motion was
recorded using a streak camera with the streak slit
located perpendicular to the long axis of the tube
and backlighting from a bright light source such as
an Argon ash 9. Data derived from this diagnostic was directly t to Eq. 4. Modern interferometry
techniques such as PDV VISAR and Fabry-Perot
can be analyzed to yield the wall velocitytime relationship directly. Data from these diagnostics can
be integrated in time and t to Eq. 4. Alternatively
Eq. 4 can be differentiated in time to obtain a tting
form that is a function of Vrt as is done in the
Direct measurement of Vrt is appealing for experiments with the ultimate goal of determining the
detonation-product pressure driving the wall as it
only requires differentiating the Vrt data or t a
single time rather than the two derivatives necessary when Xrt is measured. Additionally probebased interferometry techniques more easily allow
for multiple probes to be spaced a different axial
and radial locations along the tube wall. Use of several probes minimizes the chance of data loss due to
premature wall failure. Premature wall failure can
occur due to poorly prepared copper or the presence
of product-gas jetting. Such jetting commonly occurs when large air gaps exist in i explosives with
signicant porosity ii near poorly mated explosive
pellet joints or iii near poorly mated explosivecopper joints.
Figure 8 illustrates the t quality typical of Eq. 4.
In the top part of Fig. 8 analytic t curves dashed
black curves from Eq. 4 with parameters given in
Tab. 7 are plotted over the experimental PDV datapoints for the data from Figs. 57. The curves are
shown to approximate the average wall motion well
but do not capture the ringing features associated
with the compressibility effects present in the wall
The bottom part of Fig. 8 indicates the t residual for each trace as a percentage of the wall velocity. Fit residuals were calculated by taking the
absolute difference between the t and each experimental datapoint normalized by the experimental
Fig. 7. Velocity spectrogram for PDV3 from 200-1.
locity trajectory resulting in lower values of V.
For this reason most acceleration stops when product jetting appears cf. Fig. 5 after 48 s and Fig. 6
During cylinder test analysis the wall motion is
typically t to an analytic function. This technique
simplies presentation and comparison with numerical results. Traditionally 48 the following empirical tting form has been used to match the measured
velocitytime relationship for the tube wall
where t0 is a temporal shift parameter to accommodate delayed rst motion.
As described in Ref. 4 this tting form was designed around several constraints including
zero initial wall velocity dRdtt0  0 2 an
asymptotic approach to a steady wall velocity V
at long times dRdt  V 3 an initial nite acceleration term d2Rdt2t0  a0 associated
with a nite product pressure loading 4 a negative
initial isentrope slope implying d3Rdt3t0  0
and 5 monotically decreasing pressure for all time
Table 7. Wall motion ts to measured Vrt.
7 1.800 4.299 2.1108 37.8
Fig. 8. Comparison of analytic t to experimental
data from Figs. 57. Green  0.25 scale red  0.50
scale and cyan  2.00 scale. Top Velocity versus
Bottom Percent error between experiment
value. As the ringing amplitude decays the residual errors decrease to between 0.11. When ringing is signicant the residual errors are as large as
10. Thus the analytic ts do not provide a good
approximation of the wall motion during the compressible acceleration phase. It is worth noting that
when wall motion is subsonic no ringing is present.
Such motion exists when the conner sound speed
exceeds the detonation velocity as shown for ANFO
explosive in Refs. 10 and 11.
Fitting parameters obtained from tting the
velocity-time data to the temporal derivative of
Eq. 4 are tabulated in Table 7.
As discussed all tests in the series contained a
xed ratio of explosive ll volume to conner volume. Under this design explosive that are scaleinvariant release a constant energy per unit volume
with a reaction completion time that is very small
relative to the wall acceleration time regardless of
the charge size should accelerate all the conner
material to a similar terminal velocity regardless of
the test scale. Additionally under this assumption
all velocity proles should also overlay when the
timebase is normalized by the scale factor SF  associated with each test 112.
Figure 9 tests this assumption by plotting wall velocity versus scaled time. The two larger 0.50 and
2.00 scale traces overlay well to within 0.5 over
the full test time indicating equivalent energy release at each scale. However the smallest 0.25
scale indicates a signicant 6 velocity decit in
the late time motion relative to the 2.00 scale test.
Examination of the early time motion in the inset of
Fig. 9 shows that at extremely early scaled times
the energy of the 2.00-scale wall while the 0.25scale wall develops 12 less energy than the 2.00scale wall during the initial 10 s of motion but an
increasing amount relative to the 2.00-scale wall after 10 s.
Measured Wall Energy
Cylinder wall energies are typically reported in
terms of the kinetic energy of the wall cylinder specic energy or the Gurney energy. For a given wall
velocity Ui the cylinder specic energy is simply
i . The Gurney energy varies from this
value by a multiplier such that
Fig. 9. Scaled traces from Figs. 57. Green  0.25
scale red  0.50 scale and blue  2.00 scale.
from 02 scaled s there is negligible different between each scale. After 2 s however the 0.25
scale trace increasingly drops below the 2.00 scale
trace until 10 s where the velocity decit remains
approximately constant thereafter.
This effect is quantied in Fig. 10 which shows
where e is the explosive density w is the cylinder
density R0 is the outer wall radius and r0 is the
These measures are computed directly from the
experimental wall motion in Fig. 11 and plotted
versus the degree of scaled cylinder expansion.
Researchers traditionally report the wall energy or
Fig. 10. Wall kinetic energy decits for the red
0.25-scale trace Fig. 5 and the green 0.50-scale
trace Fig. 6 relative to the 2.00-scale trace Fig. 7.
the kinetic energy difference 1  U 2
100 between the 0.25- and 0.50-scale tests relative to the 2.00 scale case. U2.00 is the tted velocity
of the 2.0-scale test and Ui is the tted velocity of
the 0.25- and 0.50-scale tests. Thus the ts indicate that the 0.50-scale wall consistently has 99
Fig. 11. Energy versus scaled distance. Green 
0.25 scale red  0.50 scale and blue  2.00 scale.
velocity at specic scaled distances of 6.0 12.5
and 19.0 mm as indicated by the dashed lines in
Fig. 11. The relative energies reect the earlier
discussion of Fig. 10. Figure 12 shows the integrated wall motion versus time to allow translation
between position and time for each trace.
Fig. 12. Scaled position versus time. Green  0.25
scale red  0.50 scale and blue  2.00 scale.
Copper cylinder tests were performed at three different scales 0.25 0.50 and 2.00 relative to the
conventional 25.4-mm-inner-diameter test with the
insensitive explosive formulation PBX 9502. Detonation velocities wall motion histories cylinder
kinetic energy histories and Gurney energies were
reported. Analytic functions were tted to the wall
motion to average the effects of wall compressibility and report the data in concise format. The
test scale variation allowed evaluation of effect of
charge scale on the explosive energy release.
was found that the 0.50-scale experiment released
0.99 of the energy of the 2.00-scale test while the
0.25-scale experiment only released approximately
88 of the energy of the 2.00-scale test.Comparison of Small-Scale Tunnel and Large-Scale Free-Field Blast Performance 
Richard J. Lee1 Joshua E. Felts1 John Henry Williams2 and Brian Woodworth2 
1NSWC Indian Head EOD Technology Division Indian Head MD 
2Air Force Research Laboratory Munitions Directorate Eglin Air Force Base FL 
Abstract. Impulses in air from various explosives are compared for 12-g charges within a 
small tunnel steel tube that restrains expansion to one direction with those from 20-kg 
charges in free-field.  The tunnel test had a 10-g sample with a 2-g booster in the closed 
end of a 127-mm diameter by 4.6-m long steel tube with pressure transducers along its 
length.  The free-field tests had pressure transducers at different distances from a 16.9 to 
19 kg charge in a steel container of a fixed volume and a 1.81 kg booster.  Impulse data 
from both tests were normalized to explosive equivalent mass for six explosives.  The 
relative ranking was very good for three of the six explosives in both tests.  A relatively 
high  oxidizer  to  aluminum  fuel  ratio  in  the  one  explosive  with  inconsistent  ranking  is 
believed  to  be  more  advantageous  in  tunnels  than  free-field.    Three  other  explosives 
yielded very different results between one another in the free-field but very similar results 
in  the  tunnel.    Undetermined  casing  losses  was  believed  to  be  the  reason  for  the 
differences in the free-field.  Although there was no obvious change in ranking between 
these three explosives using them to compare the two tests was difficult.  
A  small-scale  tunnel  test  using  12-g  charges 
has  been  employed  at  NSWC  to  expedite  the 
optimization  of  explosive  formulations  for  better 
performance  in  tunnels.    The  use  of  this  test 
inspired  by  similar  work 
conducted by Jackson et. al. 12 and Neuwald 
et.  al.3.    The  results  from  the  tunnel  offer  a 
quantification of early energy release and impulses 
down range from the explosive charge.  There is a 
complementary  closed  chamber  test  that  uses  the 
same source section as the tunnel to quantify total 
In  a previous study  the relative  performance 
of  different  explosives  were  consistent  between 
this small scale tunnel test and a larger scale tunnel 
test  employing  2.27kg  explosives.5    This  study 
extends  the  comparison  to  larger  cased-charges 
tested  in  free-field  at  AFRL.    The  goal  was  to 
determine if free-field and tunnels yield the same 
for  blast  performance.  
Silvestrini  et.  al.  indicated  that  impulse  obtained 
from free-field and tunnels can be compared via a 
ratio  of  expansion  volume  to  charge  mass  for  a 
given explosive.6  Tunnels only allow expansion 
in one dimension delaying the decline in pressure 
and  temperature  and  allowing  more  time  for 
reactions to occur relative to the three-dimensional 
expansion in free field.  Counteracting this a onedimensional  expansion  limits  turbulent  mixing  of 
hot reactants with the air as occurs in a free-field 
blast.  Thus a comparison is more complicated for 
slower burning metal fuels that require fresh air to 
combust.    Despite  these  differences  between  the 
free-field and tunnel environments they are more 
closed-chamber7  or  ventedsimilar 
improved fuel-air mixing due to its confined space.  
As a result there was interest in seeing if free-field 
and  tunnels  would  provide  the  same  ordering  in 
blast  performance  for  explosives  with  different 
amounts  of  detonable  ingredients  oxidizer  and 
Experimental Arrangement 
Large-Scale Free-Field Blast Tests 
AFRL  performed  the  free-field  blast  tests  on 
six  different  explosives.    The  test  vessel  was  a 
steel cylinder open at the top and sealed at the base 
to  contain  the  main  charge.    The  containers 
dimensions  were  17.8-cm  ID  20.3-cm  OD  and 
40.6-cm  tall.    A  steel  end  cap  1.3-cm  thick  was 
bolted to the bottom of the container with a total 
mass of 27 kg.  The top was open ended to allow 
the  booster  to  sit  directly  on  top  of  the  charge 
outside of the container.  The 1.81 kg booster was 
comprised of three pellets with increasing diameter 
with  a  final  diameter  matching  that  of  the  main 
charge.  Since the charge was volume limited its 
mass  varied  depending  on  its  density  from  16.9 
The  charge  assembly  and 
illustrated  in  Figure  1.    The  center  of  the  charge 
was located 152 cm 60 above the ground on top 
of  a  wooden  post.    Eighteen  pressure  gauges 
arranged  along  three  lines  fanned  out  from  the 
charge separated by 45 degrees at the same height 
as  the  center  of  the  charge.    A  steel  pole  placed 
between  the  charge  and  the  first  gauge  protected 
each  line  of  gauges  from  fragments.    Gauge 
locations  along  each  line  were  7.6  10.7  13.7 
16.8 and 19.8 meters 25 35 45 55 and 65 feet 
respectively from the center of the charge.  Each 
line of gauges included a 6th gauge located 0.15 m 
6  from  a  selected  gauge  location  to  quantify 
local  wave  velocities  at  distances  near  10.7  13.7 
Fig. 1. Free-Field Blast Tests Arrangement Sketch 
of  charge  on  test  stand  left  and  pressure  gauge 
layout  right.    Circles  and  squares  represent 
fragment strippers and gauges respectively. 
Small-Scale Tunnel Tests 
A sketch of the small-scale tunnel is shown in 
Figure 2.  It is a steel tube with a 12.7-cm 5-in 
inner  diameter  and  460-cm  15-ft  length.    The 
diameter and sample size were chosen to limit the 
mixing of reactive detonation products and the air.  
For  a  sample  with  4.5  grams  of  aluminum  5.2 
tunnel diameters 66 cm are required to combust 
all of the aluminum.     
A length-to-diameter ratio of at least one was 
desired for the sample.  For a sample diameter of 
1.91-cm  0.75  in  the  length  of  a  10-g  sample 
varied  from  1.91  to  2.54  cm  0.75  to  1.0-in 
depending on its density.  The steel charge holder 
provided  confinement  around  the  charge  with  a 
wall  thickness  of  2.86-cm  1.125-in.    This  high 
confinement  allowed  detonation  of  samples  with 
critical  diameters  over  1.91-cm  0.75  in.    The 
holders  had  a  conical  booster  of  2-grams  of  an 
RDX  based  plastic  bonded  explosive  PBX 
initiated  by  an  RP-80  detonator.    The  charge 
holder  bolted  to  the  back  of  the  source  section.  
Rubber  sheeting  was  wrapped  around  the  outer 
diameter  of  the  charge  holder  to  form  a  1.91-cm 
0.75-in  thick  buffer  between  the  holder  and 
inside  surface  of  the  source  section.    This  rubber
Fig. 2 Sketch of Small-Scale Tunnel  
wrap served two purposes lessen the damage from 
fragments on the source section and minimize the 
shock input on the steel wall.  The source section 
assembly  was  bolted  onto  the  end  of  the  tunnel 
with  a  plastic  ring  in  between  it  and  the  tunnel.  
The plastic ring dampened the shock to the tunnel 
and aided in keeping the rubber wrap from exiting 
the  source  section  with  the  fragments  from  the 
charge holder.  The charge holder typically broke 
into four large pieces which became lodged in the 
rubber  along  with  a  number  of  much  smaller 
pieces.    The  other  end  of  the  tunnel  remained 
open.  Almost all of the energy was directed down 
the  tunnel  with  minimal  mechanical  or  thermal 
energy losses due to this design. 
transducers  were  used  in  each  test  to  measure 
pressure at 30.5-cm 1-ft intervals starting at 61cm  2-ft  and  ending  at  366-cm  12-ft  from  the 
face  of  the  charge  holder  along  the  length  of  the 
tunnel.    These  gauges  have  a  rise-time  of  1s  a 
range of 6.8 MPa 1000 psi and resolution of 35 
Pa  5  mpsi.    In  initial  trials  the  gauges  were 
mounted  directly  into  the  tunnel  which  led  to  a 
high mortality rate for the gauges and noise on the 
signals.  In subsequent test series the gauges were 
mounted in PVC adapters to isolate them from the 
steel  walls  of  the  tunnel  which  resolved  the 
problem.  No obvious perturbation of the pressure 
wave was attributed to the adaptors.  The annulus 
of PVC around each gauge was about 50 of the 
gauge diameter.  Two different metrics were used 
to  evaluate  the  data  1  energy  release  calculated 
from  point  source  blast  theory  and  2  equivalent 
mass from impulse vs. distance.   
Description of Explosives 
The  six  plastic-bonded  cast-cured  explosives 
are generally described in Table 1.  Explosives AC  contained  varying  amounts  of  an  oxidizer  as 
well  as  aluminum  nitramine  and  binder.  
Explosives  D  and  E  had  no  additional  oxidizer 
aside from its nitramine concentration and varying 
amounts  of  aluminum  and  binder.    Explosive  F 
was  a  nitramine  based  explosive  with  a  binder.  
Amounts  of  oxidizer  per  mass  and  consequently 
Explosive  B.    Moreover  explosive  A  and  C  had 
more  aluminum  per  mass  than  explosive  B.  
Explosive D had less aluminum than explosive E.  
All binder were inert i.e. there were no energetic 
plasticizers used in these formulations. 
to  Explosive  A  and  again 
to  aluminum  ratios 
Table  1.  General  Description  of  Explosives  with 
regards to relative level of ingredients 
Expl.  Nitramine  Aluminum  Oxidizer 
EoI  and  the  baseline.    The  scaling  is  done  by 
dividing  each  impulse  and  distance  by  the  cubed 
root of the respective charge weights.  Cubed root 
scaling comes from the spherical expansion of the 
blast  wave  in  free  field.    Selecting  the  scaled 
impulses  and  distances  for  both  explosives  EoI 
the  calculation  of 
Figure  3.    A  point  on  the  baseline  curve  is 
arbitrarily  chosen.    The  corresponding  point  for 
comparisons  is  where  a  45o  line  passing  through 
the chosen point on the baseline curve crosses the  
EoI  curve.    The  ratio  of  these  scaled  impulses 
yields one calculation for equivalent mass which 
can be repeated at other points along the baseline 
curve.  Performing this calculation over a range of 
distances provides a number of values that can be 
to  produce  an  averaged  equivalent 
weight for the EoI. 
Maserjian  and  Fisher  reported  an  analytical 
graphical  one  illustrated  in  Figure  3.10    The 
basic  steps  are  provided  here  using  the  quadratic 
expression in Equation 2.   They used a power law 
fit for their data instead of the quadratic used here. 
Fig. 3. Illustration of graphical selection of scaled 
impulses used to determine an equivalent weight at 
a selected scaled distance. 
Free-Field Blast Test 
Pressure  and  impulse  data  are  typically  used 
to  determine  the  relative  blast  performance  of  an 
explosive  of  interest  EoI  to  that  of  a  baseline 
explosive.  We focused on just the positive phase 
impulse for this comparison.   The positive phase 
impulse  was  determined  by 
pressure wave with respect to time.  These impulse 
data  were  adjusted  for  standard  temperature  and 
pressure  STP  using  Equation  1.9 
adjustment allows for a comparison between tests 
conducted under different atmospheric conditions.   
                         1 
where Istp is the adjusted impulse to STP Pz and 
Tz are the atmospheric pressure and temperature at 
test  time  P0  and  T0  are  the  standard  temperature 
i.e.  14.7  psi  and  298.15  K 
The  metric  of  comparison  is  the  explosives 
equivalent  weight  to  that  of  a  baseline  explosive 
which is the ratio of the charge mass to that of the 
baseline for the same impulse at the same distance 
  This  requires  scaling  the 
impulses and associated distances with the mass of 
the  charge  cased-sample  and  bare-booster.    The 
first step in the process was to establish a quadratic 
fit to lnIstp vs. lnr taking the form of Equation 
where r is the radial distance from the charge and 
A  B  and  C  are  constants  established  by  the  fit.  
All  18 data  points  from  the  three  lines of gauges 
are  used  for  this  fit  to  ensure  that  each  radial 
distance from the charge was represented in the fit 
in case a pressure gauge was struck by fragments 
and consequently did not provide usable data.  The 
next  step  requires  selection  of  appropriate  data 
from  scaled-impulse  vs.  scaled-distance  for  the 
determination of r and lnrs using Equations 3 
                     3 
where    is  a  ratio  of  the  natural  logs  of  scaled 
distance and impulse for the baseline explosive at 
any given value along its curve Wbl is the baseline 
charge  weight  Iblr  is  the  impulse  value  for  the 
baseline  at  distance  r  rs  is  the  distance  shown  in 
Figure 3 that corresponds to the desired impulse to 
compare with  Iblr and A B C are the constants 
from  the  quadratic  fit  for  the  EoI  given  in  
The scaled impulses at associated rs distances 
were calculated for each explosive over the range 
of  distances  associated  with 
Equation  5.    The  equivalent  mass  Weq  was 
determined by Equation 6 i.e. the ratio of scaled 
impulses  EoI  to  baseline  cubed.    The  reported 
values are the averages over the range of distances 
                                                6 
where Is is the scaled impulse for the EoI WEoI is 
the  EoI  charge  mass  Weq  is the  equivalent  mass 
and Isbl is the scaled impulse for the baseline.   
Initial Energy Release in the Tunnel 
There were two key metrics for the tunnel 1 
the initial energy release described here and 2 the 
equivalent  mass  from  impulse  data  described  in 
the  next  section.    Typical  pressure  and  impulse 
traces  are  given  in  Figures  4  and  5  respectively 
with  time  relative  to  the  firing  of  the  detonator.  
Features characteristic of a one-dimensional blast 
wave can be seen in the traces including pressure 
decreasing with time and distance from the source 
event and a negative phase.   
Fig. 4. Example of pressure waves in the tunnel 
Fig. 5. Example of impulses in the tunnel showing 
decreasing  partial  impulses  vs.  distance.    Partial 
impulses were integrations of each pressure wave 
to 1.5 ms after its time of arrival. 
Energy  release  for  each  explosive  can  be 
calculated  from  point  source  blast  theory.    For  a 
linear  one-dimensional  geometry  the  source  is 
actually  a  plane  instead  of  a  point.    Planarity  is 
likely achieved within two tunnel diameters which 
is a little less than 30.5-cm 1-ft of travel from the 
charge.    Estimates  of  early  time  energy  release 
were made using a time of arrival ToA analysis.  
The first gauge location used in the initial energy 
release  analysis  was  123-cm  4-ft  from  the 
charge.  Therefore it is expected that this analysis 
captures energy from the detonation and early post 
detonation  reactions  between  added  fuels  and  the 
products and possibly from some mixing with the 
air  before  the  planar  wave  was  achieved.    There 
could be enhanced mixing with the air in this time 
period as opposed to a charge that had a diameter 
equal  to  the diameter  of  the tunnel.    The  ToA of 
the blast wave at a number of distances from  the 
charge  was  related  to  the  energy  released  by  a 
the  method  developed  by 
 cid1844cid4666cid1872cid46671cid1837cid2870cid3429cid343632cid1837cid2870cid3493cid1831cid2868cid1872cid1837cid2869cid2871cid2870cid3415cid3440cid2870cid2871cid3415 cid1837cid2869cid3433 
with cid1837cid2869 cid2870cid3002cid3096cid3294cid3019cid3294
cid3435cid3082cid3282cid2878cid2869cid3439cid3118 and 
cid1837cid2870cid2870cid3002cid3096cid3116cid3427cid3435cid3082cid3282cid2878cid2870cid3082cid3279cid3439cid2879cid2869cid3431
cid3435cid3082cid3282cid2878cid2869cid3439cid3118cid4666cid3082cid3279cid2879cid2869cid4667
where R is the distance from the charge the blast 
has traveled at time t E0 is the energy released by 
the  charge  A  is  the  cross-sectional  area  of  the 
tunnel s is the density of the explosive charge Rs 
is  the  thickness  of  the  charge  if  it  had  crosssectional area A instead of its actual dimension 0 
is the density of the gas in the tunnel g and d are 
the ratio of specific heats for the gas in the tunnel 
1.4 and the explosive products 3.0 respectively. 
 For each set of ToA data E0 was calculated 
transforming  Equation  7 
yR  mE0t where y and m are functions of R 
and  E0.    This  allowed  determination  of  E0  as  the 
only unknown value in the slope of the line.  The 
value  calculated  represents  the  early  time  energy 
release from the sample and booster combination.  
The 2-g booster contribution was subtracted based 
on  analysis  of  12-g  tests  of  just  the  booster 
Equivalent Mass from Impulses in the Tunnel 
The key metric for comparing the tunnel and 
field  tests  was  impulse.    The  partial  impulse  was 
integrated  from  each  pressure-time  trace  out  to   
1.5 ms past the blast front.  The position of partial 
impulse data in association with the peak impulse 
is shown in Figure 5.  The equivalent masses were 
determined  in  a  similar  manner  to  that  described 
for the free-field test except that the mass scaling 
is linear i.e. Is  IW instead of the cubed root of 
mass.    The  linear  scaling  is  due  to  the  linear 
increase  in  volume  in  the  tunnel  as  the  distance 
from the charge increases.  In addition the partial 
impulse  was  used  instead  of  the  peak  impulse 
because the peak appeared to vary up and down as 
the  wave  propagated  down  the  tunnel.    This  is 
believed to be due to an elongated positive phase 
resulting from the confinement of the tunnel walls. 
Figure  6  compares  explosives  C  and  D  in 
logarithmic  space  for  the  tunnel.    This  figure 
illustrates  how  a  region  of  comparison  was 
selected  for  the  tunnel  to  establish  equivalent 
masses for each of the explosives using Explosive 
D as the baseline.  Firstly Explosive C displays an 
initial region where the impulses do not fit along 
the  quadratic  fit  of  the  data  further  down  range.  
This  is  believed  to  be  a  region  where  the  blast 
wave is still developing as fuels combust.  All the 
explosives displayed this behavior.  It appeared to 
end with a more regular decline in partial-impulse 
after 152-cm 5-ft down range.  At the other end 
of this region of regular decline is a sudden drop in 
impulse after 335 cm 11 ft down range where a 
relief wave from the end of the tunnel is believed 
to  be  coming  back  and  prematurely  reducing  the 
impulse.    So  the  region  between  152-cm  and    
335-cm  5  and  11-ft  was  selected  to  determine 
equivalent masses.  
Fig.  6.  LnI  vs.  Lnr  for  the  tunnel  showing 
region of comparison to determine equivalent mass 
Results and Discussion 
While performance in the free-field and tunnel 
will  be  compared  on  a  basis  of  equivalent  mass 
from  impulse  data  the  alternate  method  for 
analyzing  tunnel  data  initial  energy  release 
provides insight into reactions.  The explosives in 
the  tunnel  allow  a  direct  comparison  of  initial 
energy from ToA analysis to that available in the 
formulation.    These  data  will  be  presented  first 
followed by comparisons with equivalent mass in 
the  tunnel  and  then  in  the  free-field  to  better 
the  following  charts  are 
normalized  with  respect  to  those  of  Explosive  D.  
The  error  bars  associated  with  initial  energy 
release  represent  the  maximum  and  minimum 
energy  values  from  replicated  tests.      The  error 
bars  for  equivalent  masses  are  from  fitting  the 
impulse data from replicate tests to Equation 2 and 
the  standard  deviation  of  data  from  Equation  6 
configuration.    Figures  7-10  list  the  explosive  as 
A-F  with  formulation  information  encoded  in 
relative  concentrations 
nitramine N aluminum A and oxidizer O as 
high H medium M or low L respectively. 
the  range  of  distances 
for  anaerobic  energy 
Figure  7  compares  measured  initial  energy 
energetic ingredients and handbook values for heat 
of  detonation  from  just  the  nitramines.    The 
calculated energies are normalized with respect to 
the  experimental  value  for  Explosive  D.    The 
initial energy for the non-aluminized Explosive F 
matched  the  energy  for  its  nitramine  contribution 
indicating  that  any  contribution  from  the  binder 
was offset by heat losses.  Both are probably minor 
that  differences  shown  for  other 
explosives  are  primarily  due  to  the  extent  of 
aluminum reaction.  The initial energy release for 
all the aluminized explosives A-E exceeded their 
nitramines only value but not their total anaerobic 
energy.  This indicates that some but not all of the 
aluminum  that  could  react  within  the  products 
contributed  to  the  initial  energy  and  downstream 
impulse  data.    It  is  interesting  to  note  that 
Explosives  A  B  and  D  were  over  70  efficient 
but  Explosive  C  and  E  were  just  54  and  58 
efficient respectively. 
Meas. Initial Energy
Calc. Anaerobic Energy Nitramines only
Fig. 7.  Measured initial energy release compared 
to calculations of energy from energetics only and 
total anaerobic energy 
Figure  8  compares  the  two  data  reduction 
techniques  for  the  tunnel  initial  energy  release 
from  ToA  measurements  and  equivalent  mass 
from impulse data.  The order of explosives from 
equivalent  mass.    The  initial  energy  follows  this 
trend  for  all  the  explosives  except  Explosives  C 
  Because  there  is  no  aluminum  in  
Explosive F this suggests that whatever aluminum 
reacted  in  the  other  explosives  had  done  so 
promptly  except  for  Explosives  C  and  E.      Note 
that the data in this figure would not change much 
if Explosive F had been selected as the reference.  
The two analyses are nearly comparable except for 
the  slight  differences  noted  for  Explosives  C  and 
E.    The  equivalent  mass  for  Explosive  E  is  20 
higher  than  its  normalized  initial  energy  release.  
The  next  largest  difference  is  with  Explosive  C 
with  equivalent  mass  9  higher.    The  equivalent 
mass  for  all  the  other  explosives  are  nearly 
equivalent or 4 lower than the normalized initial 
energy  release.    This  suggests  that  Explosives  C 
and E had continued aluminum contribution to the 
impulse beyond the initial energy release analysis.  
This  further  indicates  that  much  of  the  available 
fuels are not reacting for each of the explosives but 
in  particular  with  Explosives  C  and  E      This  is 
likely  due  to  the  relative  low  concentration  of 
oxidizer in Explosive C and none in Explosive E 
coupled with the presence of aluminum. 
Initial Energy - Tunnel
Equiv. Mass - Tunnel
Fig  8.    Measured  initial  energy  release  compared 
to equivalent mass in the tunnel 
In  the  free-field  Figure  9  equivalent  mass 
and  calculated  aerobic  and  anaerobic  energies 
follow  the  same  trend  except  for  Explosive  E.  
Aerobic  energy  was  calculated  from  the  heats  of 
combustion of all ingredients except for the binder 
assuming that the binder burns slowly enough that 
it does not contribute to the free-field blast.  The 
theoretical  energies  in  this  chart  are  normalized 
Explosive  D.    Because  these  tests  had  unknown 
energy  imparted  to  the  casing  which  depends  on 
the  explosive  no  direct  comparisons  between 
measured and theoretical energies are possible like 
that in Figure 7 for the tunnel.    
the  anaerobic  energy 
Equivalent  mass  follows  anaerobic  energy 
except  for  Explosive  E  which  is  more  fuel  rich 
because  of  a  medium  concentration  of  aluminum 
without additional oxidizer.  This is evident by the 
largest  difference  between 
its  anaerobic  and 
aerobic energies.   Explosive E must rely more on 
fuel-air mixing than the other explosives which is 
why its equivalent mass does not follow the trend 
with calculated energies.   
Figure 10 compares equivalent masses for the 
free-field  and  tunnel  tests.    The  three  explosives 
ABC  that  did  better  than  Explosive  D  in  both 
tests had oxidizer in the formulation to assist with 
anaerobic  combustion  of  aluminum.  The  other 
three  without  oxidizer  DEF  indicate  the  utility 
of  some  amount  of  oxidizer  for 
performance in both free-field and tunnels.   
Equiv. Mass - Free-Field
Calc. Aerobic Energy - no binder
Calc. Anaerobic Combustion
Fig. 9.  Equivalent mass in free-field compared to 
calculated  heat  of  combustion  leaving  out  the 
binder and anaerobic energy 
Fig. 10.  Equivalent masses for the tunnel and freefield tests. 
The  relative  performance  in  free-field  and 
formulation.  For Explosives A and B with a better 
balance  of  oxidizer  and  aluminum  the  equivalent 
masses were nearly the same  2.  
for  each  explosive  depends  on 
performance in the free-field but Explosive C was 
16  less  in  the  tunnel.      These  explosives  had  a 
high  amount  of  aluminum  and  similar  anaerobic 
energy.    However  Explosive  C  had  a  lower 
relative amount of oxidizer making it less efficient 
Explosive  B  with  less  aluminum  and  more 
oxidizer than Explosive C had less free-field but 
better  tunnel  performance.    Explosive  C  has 
slightly higher anaerobic energy than Explosive B.  
However Explosive B has a much higher oxidizer 
to aluminum ratio which provides an advantage in 
anaerobic-combustion  efficiency  in  tunnels  where 
fuel-air mixing is highly limited.   Remember that 
explosive B had a higher initial energy release than 
that  for  Explosive  C  despite  its  lower  anaerobic 
energy from Figure 7.  Therefore some caution is 
required when comparing relative ranking between 
tunnels  with  regard 
Explosives E and F were 21.6 and 35 less 
than Explosive D in the free-field.  Explosives D 
and E did not contain an oxidizer to help with the 
anaerobic combustion of aluminum.  Explosive E 
had  less  nitramine  and  more  aluminum  than 
Explosive  D.    The  formulation  for  Explosive  F 
was based on just nitramine and binder.    
The ranking for explosive D E and F are very 
similar  in  the tunnel within 3.5.    The disparity 
between equivalent masses of Explosives E and F 
from the free-field and the tunnel are not due to the 
differences  in  charge  size.    An  earlier  study 
observed  good  agreement  between 
performance  ranking  in  a  small-scale  and  largerscale tunnel using bare charges.5  It is speculated 
that  these  differences  are  related  to  losses  in  the 
casing.    The  tunnel  tests  had  undetermined  but 
probably small losses to the charge holder and tube 
walls  as  observed  in  comparing  initial  energy 
releases  and  equivalent  masses  in  Figure  8.    The 
free-field tests had undefined losses due to heating 
and accelerating the casing which varied between 
equivalent mass between free-field and tunnel for 
Explosives D E and F may be due to the presence 
of the casing in the free-field tests.  It is difficult to 
say at this time if the comparison would improve 
if  effects  of  the  casing  could  be  included  in  the 
the  six  explosives 
The  comparison  of  impulse  data  in  free-field 
tests with cased charges and a small-scale tunnel 
which is predictive of large-scale tunnels shows a 
strong  correlation  with  equivalent  mass  for  three 
explosives had very different equivalent masses in 
the free-field but very similar in the tunnel.  These 
differences  are  speculated  to  be  the  result  of 
undefined  losses  to  the  casing  in  the  free-field.  
Accounting  for  these  losses  was  outside  of  the 
scope  of  data  available  for  this  comparison  but 
would be the next step in comparing free-field and 
tunnel  tests.    Although  there  was  no  obvious 
change in ranking between these three explosives 
using them to compare the two tests was difficult. 
It is difficult to say how they might compare once 
the  effects  of  casing  losses  are  addressed.    The 
three  explosives  with  oxidizer  had  less  nitramine 
and therefore lower casing loses which is why two 
of  them  had  such  good  agreement  between  the 
free-field and the tunnel.  Explosives with varying 
amounts  of  oxidizer  and  aluminum  ratio  do  not 
necessarily yield comparable results between freefield and tunnels.    
The authors want to thank Dr. William Wilson 
the  Defense  Threat  Reduction  Agency 
DTRA  and  the  Air  Force  Space  and  Missile 
Center  for  support  of  this  work.    We  would  also 
like  to  thank  Kevin  Gibson  Linda  Wright  and 
Energetics  Evaluation  Division  for  pressing  the 
boosters  for  the  small-scale  tunnel  tests  and  the 
processing  team  at  AFRL  Eglin  for  filling  the 
free-field  charges.    Special  thanks  to  Harold 
Sandusky NSWC IHEODTD and Christine Lang 
Trident  Technical  College  Charleston  SC  for 
helpful discussions and encouragement.   A Comparison of Wavelet Quadrature and Peak-to-Peak Methods for Determining 
Shock Velocity from Microwave Interferometer Data 
David E. Kittell Jesus O. Mares and Steven F. Son1 
1Purdue University West Lafayette IN USA 
Microwave  interferometry  MI  is  used  to  measure  shock  and  detonation 
velocities  in  explosives.  To  achieve  greater  spatial  resolution  modern  systems  employ  a 
quadrature mixer to continuously measure the phase advancement of the output signal over time. 
However quadrature analysis is difficult to implement on data having a low signal to noise ratio 
variable  amplitude  and  harmonic  frequencies.  In  this  work  a  continuous  wavelet  transform 
CWT based on the Gabor mother wavelet was used to analyze velocity data. The wavelet-based 
method is compared with the previous techniques of quadrature and peak-to-peak analysis using 
real  and  manufactured  data  from  a  small-scale  explosives  characterization  experiment.  Results 
show that the wavelet-based analysis has multiple advantages over peak-to-peak and quadrature 
including a greater robustness for handling signal noise increased velocity-time resolution and a 
single  tunable  parameter  that  may  be  optimized  for  different  types  of  signals.  In  addition  the 
wavelet-based  technique  was  used  to  show  the  effect  of  density  variations  in  the  explosive 
triaminotrinitrobenzene  TATB.  This  technique  also  has  the  potential  to  distinguish  multiple 
independent frequencies and should be considered to study the decoupling of shock and reaction 
zones.  Overall  a  wavelet-based  technique  is  suggested  as  an  improved  addition  to  the  analysis 
tools used in the field of explosives research and in particular to microwave interferometry. This 
analysis approach could also be applied to other experimental data. 
Microwave  interferometry  MI  is  an 
to  measure  shock  and 
detonation velocities in explosives. This technique 
is  used  to  measure  the  phase  and  amplitude  of 
microwave signals that are transmitted through an 
unreacted explosive and reflected back at locations 
of  interest.  These  reflection  points  are  located  at 
dielectric discontinuities such as a shock wave or a 
reaction  front  that  occur  in  the  media  during  a 
detonation  event12.  The  phase  measurements  can 
then  be  used  to  infer  the  relative  position  and 
velocity of the phenomena. 
While  the  established  peak-to-peak  and 
quadrature methods are often adequate for tracking 
the  location  of  a  moving  strong  reflector  as  in  a 
shock  or  detonation  wave  instantaneous  velocity 
challenging  due  to  inherent  numerical  errors 
associated  with  these  methods.  A  new  approach 
exploits  the  proportionality  of  the  velocity  of  the 
reflector to the relative phase change of the signal 
through  the  use  of  time-frequency  analysis.  This 
would  suggest  consideration  of  a  continuous 
wavelet transform CWT due to greater flexibility 
for  optimizing  time-frequency  resolution  than  the 
short-time Fourier transform STFT alternative3. 
Wavelet  analysis  has  been  applied  in 
photonic Doppler velocimetry PDV45 and optical 
techniques such as velocity interferometer system 
for any reflector VISAR6. For these applications 
a  CWT  was  shown  to  be  advantageous  for 
measuring  shock  velocity4-6.  In  this  work  a  new 
data  analysis  technique  is  proposed  to  directly 
measure  velocity  of  a  detonation  event  using  a 
different  CWT  based  method.  The  proposed 
technique  was  compared  to  currently  established 
procedures by  processing  manufactured  data  with 
known frequency-time content and effective error 
was evaluated for each method. Select examples of 
real  data  of  a  small  scale  explosives  test  were 
processed  using  each  method  and  the  results  are 
directly  compared  for  further  evaluation.  This 
method is suggested as an improved addition to the 
analysis  tools  used  in  the  field  of  microwave 
interferometry and possibly other similar data. 
Experimental Methods 
A  35  GHz  signal  was  generated  using  a 
transmitted to the test article through a solid 0.635 
cm  diameter  Teflon  waveguide.  A  quadrature 
mixer was used to produce two-channel output 90 
degrees out of phase and was recorded at 2.5 GHz 
using  a  Tektronix  DPO4034  Digital  Phosphor 
Oscilloscope.  Timing  of  the  experiment  is  based 
on first light observed by fiber optics a M34L02 
Thorlab patch cable with a 600 m core diameter 
photodetector with a 1 ns rise time. The detonation 
is  contained  inside  a  thick-walled  steel  box  a 
schematic of the experiment is shown in Fig. 1. 
In  this  study  two  types  of  explosives 
were pressed into 0.651 cm I.D. 304 stainless steel 
for  velocity  measurement  Kinepak 
ammonium  nitrate  mixed  with  fuel  oil  ANFO 
and  triaminotrinitrobenzene  TATB  powder.  To 
intimately  mix  the  ANFO  20  g  batches  were 
mixed  on  a  Resodyn  Butte  MT  LabRAM 
resonant  mixer  for  5  min  at  80  intensity.  A 
Teledyne Risi Inc. RP-502 exploding bridge-wire 
EBW detonator was used to initiate a detonation 
in  Primasheet  1000  Ensign  Bickford  which 
transitioned  into  the  test  explosive.  In  these 
experiments  1.9  g  of  ideal  explosive  1.44 
gcm3  and  2  to  2.5  g  of  the  test  explosive  were 
incrementally  pressed  whereas  the  ANFO  was 
loosely packed by hand. Pressing details for select 
cases  discussed  in  this  work  are  summarized  in 
Fig. 1. Schematic drawing of the small-scale microwave interferometer experiment. 
Table 1.  Pressing details for the test cases shown 
Formally  the  CWT  of  a  time-varying 
The Continuous Wavelet Transform CWT 
signal cid1858cid4666cid1872cid4667 is given by11 
cid1849cid1858cid4666cid1873cid1871cid4667 cid3505cid1858cid4666cid1872cid46671cid1871cid2032cid3436cid1872cid1873cid1871 cid3440cid1856cid1872
variables cid2032cid4666cid1872cid4667  is  the  mother  wavelet  and cid2032 
where  u  and  s  are  the  translation  and  scale 
the  complex  conjugate.  Scale  and 
translation  are  related  to  time  and  frequency 
the  mother  wavelet. 
Following  previous  work3-6  a  Gabor  mother 
wavelet was chosen as the basis for the CWT and 
is given by the formula 
cid4666cid1872cid4667
where cid2026  and cid2015  are  the  time  spread  and  center 
frequency parameters. For the Gabor wavelet time 
and  frequency  can  be  related 
cid4666cid2026cid2870cid2024cid4667cid2869cid2872cid1857cid2879cid3047cid3118cid2870cid3097cid3118cid1857cid3036cid3086cid3047 
cid2033cid2015cid1871. 
Kim and Kim12 show that the Gabor wavelet shape 
is controlled by a single dimensionless parameter 
and  introduce  the  notation  of  a  Gabor  wavelet 
shaping  factor cid1833cid1871cid2026cid2015  where cid2026  is  set  to  unity. 
The shaping factor cid1833cid1871 governs the time-frequency 
resolution  of  the  CWT  the  effect  of cid1833cid1871  on  the 
shape of the Gabor mother wavelet is depicted in 
Fig. 2. A discussion of the properties of the Gabor 
mother wavelet may be found in other work1213. 
Fig.  2.  Gabor  mother  wavelet  for  shaping  factors 
The admissibility condition of the mother 
wavelet11  and  acceptable  time  resolution12  limit 
cid1833cid1871 of 3 6 and 9. 
potential cid1833cid1871  values  between  approximately  3  and 
based functions. The optimum cid1833cid1871 value is usually 
5.5.  An  optimization  routine  is  needed  and  two 
potential options include a Shannon entropy-based 
cost function12 and a proposed cost function based 
proposed  cost  function  was used  in  this  work  for 
its  increased  accuracy  over  the  Shannon  entropy
integration 
near  4  and  this  value  may  be  fixed  for  initial 
assessment of the CWT method. 
All  CWT-based  methods  suffer  from  an 
edge-effect when part of the wavelet is integrated 
beyond the length of a signal using zero-padding 
or  otherwise131516.  Minimizing  the  edge-effect  is 
the  subject  of  ongoing  research16  the  approach 
used  in  this  work  was  to  remove  the  affected 
region from the wavelet transform according to 
where cid1844 is the region in time to discard from the 
start or end cid2026cid3047cid3048cid3046 is the time spread at the start or 
end13  and cid1863  is  a  multiple  of  the  time  spread. 
cid1844cid1863cid2026cid3047cid3048cid3046 
Values  for  k  are  suggested  based  on  the  level  of 
After the wavelet transform is calculated 
according to Eq. 1 a normalized scalogram may 
be  used  to  visualize  the  time-frequency  energy 
density of the CWT as12 
cid1840cid3024cid1858cid4666cid1873cid1871cid4667cid1849cid1858cid4666cid1873cid1871cid4667cid2870
Dominant  frequencies  in  the  original  signal cid1858cid4666cid1872cid4667 
appear  as  ridges  or  peaks  on  the  normalized 
scalogram. A ridge detection algorithm is used to 
extract the time-frequency history of the signal in 
the  analysis  of  a  single  dominant  frequency  it  is 
sufficient to consider the location of the maximum 
scalogram amplitude as a function of time.  
An example of the CWT applied to data 
from the small scale characterization experiment is 
shown  in  Figs.  3  and  4.  In  this  example  pressed 
TATB  70  TMD  case  T2  is  initiated  by  an 
explosive  booster.  Two  quadrature 
obtained  from  the  microwave  interferometer  are 
shown in Fig. 2 the transition between booster and 
explosive occurs at time zero. 
Fig.  3.  Example  of  MI  quadrature  output  signals 
for detonation in pressed TATB case T2. 
wavelet  with cid1833cid18714  was  applied  to  the  first 
A  CWT  based  on  the  Gabor  mother 
quadrature  signal  top  in  Fig.  3.  A  normalized 
scalogram was then calculated shown in Fig. 4. In 
the  scalogram  solid  lines  to  the  left  and  right 
correspond to Eq. 4 for k1-6 and represent the 
extent of the edge effect for the CWT i.e. loss of 
accuracy  due  to  zero  padding.  The  transition  in 
explosives occurs when the frequency drops from 
2.5  MHz  to  2.2  MHz.  The  ridge  analysis  is 
indicated by a solid black line drawn over the local 
maximum in scalogram amplitude. 
Fig.  4.  Example  of  a  normalized  scalogram  and 
ridge analysis for pressed TATB case T3. 
Velocity Calculations 
Three analysis techniques  peak-to-peak 
quadrature and wavelet analysis  were compared 
between  manufactured  and 
summarized  in  Table  2.  All  techniques  are  based 
on the velocity-frequency relationship1 
is  a  calibrated  material 
wavelength.  The  material  wavelength  depends  on 
frequency  sample  diameter  and 
cid1874cid4666cid1872cid4667cid20192cid1858cid4666cid1872cid4667 
where  cid1858cid4666cid1872cid4667  now  represents 
frequency  and  cid2019 
permittivity  values of cid2019 are listed in Table 2. For 
the signal by 2cid2024 corresponds to the advance of the 
moving  reflector  by cid20192  and  is  indicated  by  the 
according to cid1874cid3036cid2878cid2869 cid20192
cid1872cid3036cid2878cid2869cid1872cid3036 
cid1874cid4666cid1872cid4667 cid20194cid2024cid1856cid2016cid1856cid1872 
Quadrature  analysis  provides  greater 
spatial resolution and is implemented by replacing 
Eq. 6 with the set of equations17 
time  from  peak-to-peak.  Thus  average  velocity 
may  be  calculated  between  the  i  and  i1  peaks 
the peak-to-peak method each advance in phase of 
Table 3.  Summary of filter parameters needed for the quadrature analysis. 
cid2019cid3006cid3051.  
cid1872cid3042cid3048cid3047 s 
cid1872cid3036cid3041 s 
Key LPFlow pass Butterworth filter of order N non-dimensional 
cut-off frequency Wn FFTD FFT-based derivative and LPF. 
cid2016cid1872cid1853cid1866cid2879cid2869cid3436cid18482cid18481cid3440 
where cid18481  and cid18482  are  the  microwave  quadrature 
signals  offset  by  90  degrees  and cid1872cid1853cid1866cid2879cid2869  is  the 
discontinuous  arctangent 
function  effectively 
unwrapping  the  phase  information  of  the  signal. 
For Eq. 8b to apply microwave signals must be 
normalized  between  -1  and  1.  The  signals  are 
filtered in multiple sections and normalized with a 
linear  mapping  between  minima  and  maxima. 
Filter  settings  are  determined  by  an  FFT  of  the 
parameters  for  each  test  case  are  summarized  in 
Table  3.  For  the  derivative  in  Eq.  8a  an  FFTbased procedure is used following similar work10. 
Table 2.  SNR frequency limits and wavelength values for all cases. 
Velocity  calculations  utilizing  wavelet 
analysis  are  implemented  with  the  MATLAB 
Wavelet ToolboxTM and a Gabor wavelet complex 
Morlet  with  Fb2  and  FcGs2.  Microwave 
signals are de-sampled from 2.5 GHz to 200 MHz 
removed.  A  normalized 
scalogram  is  computed  from  the  raw  unfiltered 
signals  however  a  2D  Savitzky-Golay  filter18  is 
used  to  eliminate  artificial  surface  roughness  on 
the  scalogram  that  might  otherwise  disrupt  a 
maximum  value  search.  This  filter  is  first  order 
spanning 33 points in time and frequency. Eq. 3b 
cid1871cid1832cid1855cid1832cid1871cid1858  
is  modified  to  determine  the  scale-frequency 
where cid1832cid1871 is sampling frequency and cid1858 is the signal 
frequency.  Frequency  limits  of  all  explosives  are 
shown  in  Table  2  the  frequency  range  was 
discretized into 8000 bins for all cases. Once the 
frequency ridge is extracted velocity is calculated 
Sharp  discontinuities  appear  in  velocity 
when  using  Eq.  6  across  materials  of  different 
wavelengths.  One  approach  for  smoothing  the 
velocity across a material interface is to scale the 
time  data  of  the  original  signal  so  that  the  CWT 
will numerically compute velocity as a multiple of 
where cid1872 is the scaled time and cid2019cid3036 is the material
cid18722cid2019cid3036cid1872 
specific  wavelength.  The  modified  signal  is  resampled as this scaling introduces a discontinuous 
sampling frequency. 
Results for a Manufactured Signal 
A manufactured test case M1 was made 
to  compare  the  velocity  obtained  from  the  three 
analysis methods with a true velocity history see 
Fig. 5. The microwave signal was generated from 
the frequency history 
cid1858cid4666cid1872cid46670.22.23cid1857cid1876cid1868cid46660.3632cid1872cid4667 
where cid1858 has units of MHz and cid1872 has units of s. 
approximately  match 
exponential  decay  corresponds  to  the  detonation 
failure observed in ANFO tests. In addition white 
Gaussian  noise  was  added  for  a  signal  to  noise 
ratio SNR of 3 to explore the effect of high levels 
of  noise.  Experimental  results  for  ANFO  have 
been observed with SNR between 3 and 5. 
Peak-to-peak  quadrature  and  waveletbased  velocity  calculations  are  shown  in  Fig.  6. 
There  is  a  clear  advantage  in  using  peak-to-peak 
and  wavelet  analysis  over  quadrature 
detonation  failure  with  a  low  SNR.  Quadrature 
analysis is based on multiple filter settings which 
struggle  to  distinguish  the  true  signal  apart  from 
high  levels  of  white  noise.  Other  difficulties  in 
quadrature  for  this  case  may  be  due  to  the  sharp 
drop in velocity over 5 s and lower overall signal 
frequencies 1 MHz. The visual appearance of the 
quadrature  data  for  M1  is  similar  to  recent 
work1019  and  justifies  the  consideration  of  a  new 
analysis technique such as wavelet analysis. 
Fig.  5.  Manufactured  test  case  signal  M1  for 
detonation failure in ANFO. 
Fig. 6. Velocity comparisons for detonation failure 
in ANFO offset for visualization. 
Results for Experimental Data 
Two experimental test cases T1 and T2 
were analyzed for detonation failure in ANFO and 
unsteady  detonation  velocity 
pressed  TATB  respectfully.  These  cases  are 
characterization  experiments.  Velocity  results  for 
cases  T1  and  T2  are  shown  in  Figs.  7  and  8. 
Velocity  history  before  time  zero  corresponds  to 
the  ideal  explosive  which  shows  a  nominally 
steady  value  of  6.95  kms.  Velocity  histories  are 
offset in Figs. 7 and 8 in both time and velocity for 
better visualization. 
evident  by  the  peak-to-peak  method  unaffected 
from filter aliasing. 
Physically  the  velocity  oscillations  in 
pressed TATB are due to density gradients from an 
incremental  pressing  procedure.  This  has  been 
verified  by  changing  the  number  of  pressing 
increments. When fewer  increments  are  used  the 
period  of  the  oscillations  is  longer  and  the 
amplitude  variation  in  velocity  is  larger  when 
more  pressing  increments  are  used  the  period  of 
the  oscillations  decreases  and  the  detonation 
velocity  in  pressed  TATB  remains  closer  to  an 
average value. As an example two test cases T2 
and T3 are shown side-by-side in Fig. 9 showing 
the variation with 5 increments 4x at 1.27cm and 
1x at 0.635cm and 9 increments 9x at 0.635cm. 
Future work will quantify the variation in density 
from the velocity and wavelength measurements. 
Fig.  9.  Variation  of  the  number  of  pressing 
increments and detonation velocity in TATB. 
The  appearance  of  wavelet  and  peak-to 
peak velocity data is similar and it is necessary to 
discuss  advantages  and  disadvantages  between 
two  methods.  Microwave  signals  are 
sampled  at  2.5  GHz  and  collect  on  the  order  105 
data points per experiment. Only a limited number 
those  data  are  used  with  peak-to-peak 
measurements to calculate an average velocity and 
thus  much  of  the  information  contained  in  the 
signal is unused 99.9. It is possible with the 
CWT to resolve information between the peaks of 
an  interference  signal13  therefore  a  normalized 
scalogram processes more time information about 
the  signal.  If  transient  events  occur  in  less  time 
Fig. 7. Velocity comparisons for real test data case 
T1 detonation failure in ANFO shifted and offset 
Fig. 8. Velocity comparisons for real test data case 
T2 unsteady detonation in pressed TATB shifted 
and offset for visualization. 
In  both  cases  T1  and  T2  similar 
observations  can  be  made  for  peak-to-peak 
quadrature  and  wavelet  analyses.  Quadrature 
analysis is clearly inferior to the peak-to-peak and 
susceptibility to noise and loss of subtle transient 
features.  Adjustments  to  filter  coefficients  Table 
3  for  the  quadrature  analysis  are  based  on 
judgment  yet  it  is  found  to  be  impossible  to 
produce velocity  plots  that  are  visually  similar  to 
the peak-to-peak and wavelet data. Moreover the 
oscillation  in  velocity  for  case  T2  Fig.  8  is 
accentuated  with  wavelet  and  peak-to-peak 
methods.  The  oscillation  in  velocity  is  real  as 
than  one  period  of  the  interferometer  signal  the 
location  of  the  peaks  cannot  resolve  velocity  or 
time.  The  event  will  simply  not  be  resolved. 
However  wavelet  analysis  requires  tuning  one 
parameter whereas peak-to-peak measurements are 
un-biased  from  signal  filtering.  An  optimization 
routine  for  the  CWT  is  critical  especially  when 
investigating  subtle  transient  features  in  velocity. 
A  final  observation  is  that  wavelet  analysis  may 
clip the full amplitude of the velocity oscillation in 
cases T2 and T3 by 10 and this is also related 
to the optimization scheme. 
The  full  advantage  of  a  wavelet-based 
frequencies in time on the normalized scalogram. 
This  capability  will  prove  advantageous 
simultaneous  frequencies  are  observed  in  the 
signal  which  may  potentially  occur  due 
decoupling of the shock and reaction zone. Future 
work will investigate such an application. 
Additional Comparisons 
Microwave interferometry MI has been 
in use for nearly the past 60 years20 and examples 
of  velocity  calculations  from  early  work  to  the 
present  day  are  shown  for  comparison.  Most 
previous  work  has  reported  a  shock  position  or 
trajectory only detonation velocity results are less 
common. The referenced work1019-21 utilizes either 
peak-to-peak  or  quadrature  analysis  and 
presented in Fig. 10. Two peak-to-peak examples 
A and B show clean velocity histories with less 
spatial resolution and two quadrature examples C 
and  D  show  a  continuous  measurement  with 
considerable  noise.  These  results  are  similar  to 
in  Figs.  6-8.  Furthermore 
examples C and D are from work since 2010. This 
emphasizes the fact that the explosives community 
continues  to  rely  on  MI  diagnostics  yet  has  not 
utilized  wavelet  analysis  for  increased  resolution 
and  robustness  in  the  measured  velocity.  In 
general  detonation  velocity  is  more  sensitive  to 
subtle  features  such  as  density  gradients  or 
Trajectory  data  may  completely  obscure  such 
transient  features  so  that  a  numerical  derivative 
introduces more noise than a direct wavelet-based 
than  a  position  or 
Fig. 10. Detonation velocity calculations using the MI technique over the last 60 years. Examples A and B 
utilize peak-to-peak measurements2021 whereas examples C and D utilize a quadrature analysis1019.  
A continuous wavelet transform based on 
the  Gabor  mother  wavelet  was  used  to  analyze 
microwave interferometer data and calculate timeresolved  detonation  velocity.  This  method  is 
suggested  as  an  improved  addition  to  currently 
established  analysis 
tools.  Each  method  was 
compared  using  manufactured  and  real  signals 
related to a small-scale explosives characterization 
experiment.  From  these  comparisons  wavelet 
analysis  shows  several  advantages  including  1 
greater robustness for handling noise 2 increased 
velocity-time  resolution  to  extract  information 
between peaks in the interference signal and 3 a 
single tunable parameter which may be optimized 
for  increased  accuracy.  Peak-to-peak  and  wavelet 
methods  were  shown  to  perform  better  than 
quadrature  analysis  for  which  transient  features 
were  obscured  due  to  higher  sensitivity  to  signal 
noise.  Oscillations  in  velocity  due  to  density 
gradients from  an  incremental  pressing procedure 
were  resolved  with  peak-to-peak  and  wavelet 
Accurate  velocity  calculations  for  the 
wavelet  analysis  required  an  optimization  routine 
to determine a value for the Gabor wavelet shaping 
factor. Possible values were limited between 3 and 
acceptable  time  resolution  needed  to  resolve 
transient  detonation  phenomena.  A  cost  function 
proposed in other work was used to minimize the 
error in velocity due to the shaping factor. 
Overall  wavelet  analysis  is  an  advanced 
interferometer  data.  It  has  been  considered  over 
the  short-time  Fourier  transform  due  to  greater 
flexibility  in  time-frequency  resolution  and  has 
the intriguing potential to more accurately resolve 
advantageous for studying the decoupling of shock 
and reaction zones and should be investigated in 
future work. From the results of this work wavelet 
analysis should make an improved addition to the 
fields of microwave interferometry and explosives 
research  wherever  peak-to-peak  and  quadrature 
analysis  are  currently  used  to  measure  a  timeresolved velocity. 
the  admissibility  condition  and 
tool  with  potential 
is  based  upon  work 
supported  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Homeland 
Security  Science  and  Technology  Directorate 
Office of University Programs under Grant Award 
2013-ST-061-ED0001. The views and conclusions 
contained in this document are those of the authors 
and  should  not  be  interpreted  as  necessarily 
representing the official policies either expressed 
or  implied  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Homeland Evaluation of the Reaction of Magnesium-Boron and Aluminum in PBX 9501
Based Explosives in the Cylinder Test 
Bryce C. Tappan1 Larry G. Hill1 Daniel N. Preston1 Joseph P. Lichthardt Geoff W. Brown David M. 
Oschwald1 Eva V. Baca1 Jonathan Romero1 Timothy A. Kuiper1 Angelo Cartelli1 and Mike P. Baca1 
Mark H. Mason2 Tara A. Cross2 
1Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM USA 
2Naval Air Warfare Center Weapons Division China Lake CA USA 
Abstract.  In  the  quest  to  achieve  ever-greater  energy  densities  in  explosives  one 
common  approach  is  the  addition  of  reactive  materials  such  as  aluminum  to  explosive 
formulations. Thermodynamically this can result in much greater energy but in practice 
the  energy  available  to  do  useful  work  is  highly  dependent  on  physical  and  chemical 
parameters  such  as  particle  size  and  reaction  kinetics.  In  this  quest  other  reactive 
materials  besides  aluminum  may  hold promise  for very rapid  energy  release  one  such 
material being magnesium-boron composite powder. In this study formulations based on 
PBX  9501  were  produced  in  which  15  of  the  HMX  was  replaced  with  reactive 
aluminum  powder  magnesium-boron  composite  powder  or  the  inert  surrogate  LiF.  A 
series  of  cylinder  tests  were  performed  in  which  detonation velocity  and  cylinder wall 
expansion  velocity  are  measured  in  order  to  determine  exactly  how  and  when 
magnesium-boron and Al contributes to the explosive event compared to the sample with 
inert LiF.  These are also compared to the baseline unmodified PBX 9501. This study is 
aimed  at  developing  a  fundamental  understanding  of  the  reaction  of  both  magnesiumboron and aluminum with explosives decomposition products where both the detonation 
and early post-detonation environment are analyzed.  Reaction rates of magnesium-boron 
composite and aluminum metal are investigated via comparison of predicted performance 
based  on  thermo-equilibrium  calculations.    The  JWL  equation  of  state  detonation 
velocities wall velocities and reaction parameters at and shortly after the CJ plane are 
some of the parameters that are analyzed.  
The addition of reactive materials to explosive 
formulations  is  a  common  approach  to  increase 
work  output  in  various  stages  of  an  explosive 
event.  Most  commonly  these  metal  additives  are 
added  to  enhance  late-term  blast  effects  but 
studies into early time metal acceleration have also 
been conducted.1-10 The most common additive is 
aluminum  powder  because  is  offers  very  high 
energy  density  with  minimal  health  and  safety 
concerns. However some composite materials can 
approach or exceed the energy density of Al and 
so  should  be  evaluated  for  utility  in  terms  of 
energy release rates and realized performance. One 
such  composite  material  that  has  been  recently 
produced is a magnesium-boron MgB composite 
powder  that offers  a high  energy density  ease  of 
ignition  and  may  possibly  circumvent  kinetically 
limiting HOBO formation during boron oxidation 
in  the  presence  of  water.11  In  order  to  determine 
the reaction behavior MgB composite powder in a 
post-detonation  environment 
formulations  based  on  PBX  9501  were  produced 
in  which  15  of  the  HMX  was  replaced  an 
additive.  The additives included Al MgB or LiF.  
Ordinary PBX 9501 was also tested.   
The  Al  powder  selected  for  this  study  was  2  m 
German  black  flake  because  of  its  high  surface 
area  and  high  active  Al  content.  Various  studies 
have been performed to determine the effects from 
various  shapes  and  sizes  of  Al  and  it  has  been 
demonstrated  that  below  15  m  in  a  detonation 
event  the  size  and  shape  of  the  Al  powder  have 
very small effects on Gurney energies of explosive 
formulations.812-14.  The  effect  of  nano-particulate 
Al  nAl  in  early  work  output  of  explosions  is 
almost  equivalent  in  detonation  events  to  small 
15m Al powder in stark contrast to combustion 
events  which  see  a  large  effects  in  reaction 
velocity.1215  Only  minor  gains  from  nAl  are 
observed within the first 1-2 s of explosion with 
a linear decrease in Gurney energy with decreasing 
active  Al  content  within  the  nAl  particle.13  Plate 
acceleration studies by Gugulya et al showed that 
work  output  was  dependent  on  the  amount  of 
active  Al  in  added  powder  and  not  as  much  Al 
particle size but enhancement of 4 can been 
increased.14516  For 
The aluminum contained in existing enhanced 
generally 20 of the total material by weight and 
generally  speaking  detonation  performance  CJ 
pressure and velocity decreases as the aluminum 
several  factors  affected  the  selection  of  reactive 
Numerous  studies  have been  performed  to  access 
the optimal loading of Al for early work output in 
explosives  which  closely  match  those  expected 
from  equilibrium  calculations  Fig.  1.  An 
aluminum percentage of 15 is also convenient as 
it is close enough to established formulations that 
comparisons  can  be  made.8  LiF  was  used  as  an 
inert  surrogate  for  Al  because  it  has  very  similar 
density and shock impedance and is not expected 
to participate in the detonation and post-detonation 
Fig.  1.  Calculated  cylinder  energies  kJcm-3  at 
VVo50 for PBX 9501 with various additions of 
Al. Energy peaks around 20 Al. 
Magnesium-boron  powder  was  obtained  by 
China  Lake  from  Mach  I  Inc.  German  black 
aluminum flake 2 m literature density  2.700 
gcm-3 was obtained from Firefox FX Enterprises 
and LiF  5 m powder literature density  2.640 
g cm-3 was purchased from Aldrich. HMX coarse 
Class 1 84  96  297 m and fine Class 5 at 
least 98  44 m and PBX 9501 were obtained 
from the LANL inventory. 
A  series  of  cylinder  tests  were  performed  in 
which  detonation  velocity  and  cylinder  wall 
expansion  velocity  are  measured  in  order  to 
determine  exactly  how  and  when  MgB  and  Al 
oxidation  releases  energy  in  the  explosive  event. 
The  cylinders  Fig.  1  were  152.4  mm  6  in  in 
length with 12.7 mm  in ID and 15.2 mm OD 
scaled down proportionally from the standard 1 in 
cylinder  test  configuration  Figure  2a.  Copper 
tubes  were  of  copper  alloy  C101.    They  were 
purchased  at  12.7  mm  ID  Copper  and  Brass 
Sales cut to lengths of 152.4 mm and the walls 
machined to thicknesses of 110 the ID.  Tolerance 
on the ID was 3.81 m and on the OD was 25.4 
m. The initial hardness of the Cu was Rockwell F 
93 half-hard Cu and the tubes were annealed 
under vacuum at 350 C for 2 hr. in order to obtain 
Rockwell F 20 dead-soft Cu. For wall velocity 
records  and  Photonic 
Doppler  Velocimetry  PDV  were  utilized  with 
PDV probe rail mounts fixed at 5.5 to angle the 
Fig.  2.    Top  Left  Cylinder  shot  set-up  showing 
PDV probes and shorting wires barely visible on 
right  side  of  cylinder    Top Right  shot  set  up  in 
view of camera port with DetasheetAr flash box.  
Bottom image sequence of PBX 9501-Al vs PBX 
probe tips toward the detonator and illumination of 
the  event  provided  by  an  argon  flash  box  behind 
the cylinder.  In each Cu cylindertest stand a total 
of  three  PDV  probesfiber  optic  cables  were 
connected to the probe rails.  The probe head and 
laser spot locations were measured to an accuracy 
of  0.5 mm.  The probe fibers were connected to a 
interferometry  system  which 
comprised the interferometer one laser and two 8GHz 20 Gsampless digitizers Tektronix 6804B. 
For  the  detonation  velocity  data  44  gauge  0.05 
mm diameter formvar-coated Cu magnet wire was 
attached at 8 points along the tube and measured 
with an optical height gauge Mitutoyo to  0.01 
mm accuracy.  The wires were held at a potential 
of  -100  V  using  a  Dynasen  pin  mixer  and 
monitored with digitizing oscilloscopes Tektronix 
TDS  540B  for  the  transient  response  of  an  RC 
circuit  by  shorting  at  the  detonation  front.    The 
The purpose of this study was aimed at developing 
a  fundamental  understanding  of  the  reaction  of 
both  MgB  and  Al  with  explosives  decomposition 
the  viability  of  MgB  as  an 
alternative  material  for  early  work  output  in 
explosives. Reaction rates of MgB composite and 
Al  metal  are  investigated  via  comparison  of 
thermoequilibrium calculations. In Table 1 the detonation 
velocities that were measured and those that were 
calculated  are  compared.  For  both 
additives  MgB  and  Al  the  measured  Velocities 
are well over those expected for 100 reaction in 
the  CJ  plane  as  has  been  previously  observed  in 
similar materials.46  
Table  1.    Calculated  and  measured  detonation 
velocities  for  PBX  9501  modifications  with  15 
detonation  velocity  was  obtained  from  a  linear 
regression between the position of the magnet wire 
and  the  time  of  arrival  of  the  detonation  front 
where  initial  times  were  normalized  to  zero.  
Charges were initiated with an SE-1-31 detonator 
and  a  12.7  mm  diameter    12.7  mm  long 
cylindrical pellet of PBX-9407. Plate dent profiles 
were determined using Solarius Development Inc. 
Viking 150 profilameter which provide a measure 
of comparative work output for each formulation. 
From  review  of  Fig.  3  we  observe  that  near 
the  end  of  the  PDV  record  the  wall  velocity  for 
PBX  9501-Al  overtakes  the  wall  velocity  of 
unmodified PBX 9501. This is an indication that a 
large portion of the Al has reacted in the timescale 
measured  and  the  energy  contribution  of  the  Al 
continues until cylinder break-up. While the PBX 
9501 has higher initial wall velocities as expected 
the  higher  energy  from  the  reacting  Al  enhances 
cylinder  wall  energy  despite  a 
production due to the formation of solid Al2O3.  
Fig. 3 PDV wall velocities of PBX 9501 vs PBX 
releases  much  more  energy  than  the  LiF-loaded 
case. The JWL isentropes for the four formulations 
are  plotted  in  figure  5  and  most  importantly 
observed is that the cylinder energies track directly 
with  wall  velocity  and  the  volumetric  energy  of 
both  Al  and  MgB  formulations  increases  over 
PBX 9501 without additive. 
The  performance  of  the  MgB  loaded  PBX 
9501 was not as impressive as the Al loaded case 
thermal  equilibrium  calculations 
predict  only  1.8  lower  cylinder  energy  at 
VVo50. In Fig. 4 we observe the wall velocity of 
the Al MgB and LiF loaded PBX 9501 with the 
MgB struggling to outperform the inert LiF loaded 
material. The inset of Fig. 4 shows the first 3 s of 
cylinder  wall  motion  where  the  Al  wall  velocity 
shows  a  divergence  from  the  LiF  within  2  s 
whereas the MgB is does not until 6 s.  
The JWL detonation product equation-of-state 
EOS  was  determined  from  PDV  wall  velocities 
by a refined version of a technique given by Hill.18 
The  JWL  pressure  isentrope is  given by  equation 
where  P  is  pressure  V    vv0  is  the  relative 
volume. The parameters A B R1 R2 and  are 
the coefficients to be fit. The JWL parameters for 
the four materials are listed in table 2.  Note that 
the five-figure precision of the A B R1 and R2 
the  purpose  of  accurately 
enforcing the necessary constraints.  They are not 
really known to the quoted level of accuracy. The 
Chapman-Jouguet and performance parameters are 
listed in table 2. As expected the Al-loaded case 
Table 2.  JWL parameters for PBX 9501 PBX 9501-Al PBX 9501-MgB and PBX 9501-LiF 
Fig. 4. PDV wall velocity trace of PBX 9501-AlMgB and LiF 
Table 3.  CJ and performance parameters for PBX 9501 PBX 9501-Al PBX 9501-MgB and PBX 9501LiF. 
The ratios of the energies of the PBX 9501-Al 
and  PBX  9501-LiF  were  used  as  a  measure  of 
completeness  of  reaction  of  Al  and  allowed  for 
the direct comparison of measured and calculated 
values. We notice a large value in the percentage 
increase in energy with the reacting Al explosive 
25.6  in  E0  from  the  JWL  which  provides 
convincing  evidence  that  much  of  the  Al  has 
reacted before cylinder break-up but less than the 
44 predicted Cheetah 7.0 as seen in Table 4.  
Fig. 5. JWL isentrope comparison for PBX 9501-Al vs PBX 9501-LiF. 
Table 4. Calculated Cheetah E50 vs measured Gurney energies of and calculated E0 and E0 from JWL 
solution of PBX 9501-Al PBX 9501-MgB and PBX 9501-LiF 
The results shown in table 4 utilize the results 
summarized  in  table  3  and  demonstrate  that  a 
large  amount  of  the  available  energy  from  Al 
reactions has been realized before cylinder breakup  in  the  case  of  the  PBX  9501-Al.  These 
conclusions cannot be made in the case of the PBX 
9501-MgB were we see only an increase of 9.6 
in  measured  energy 
compared  to  the  33.1  E50  and  the  48.3  E0 
increase  expected  in  the  calculated  energy.  Early 
PDV records indicate that the wall velocity of the 
mixture with reactive Al exceeds that of LiF even 
as  early  as  1  s.  Taken  with  the  observation Diagnostic Development on Hemispherical and Cylindrical Testing 
Elizabeth G. Francois Carl Johnson Von Whitley Mark Lieber 
Los Alamos National Laboratory 
Los Alamos NM 87545 
Abstract.  The  Onionskin  test  has  been  the  standard  test  to  evaluate  detonation  wave 
breakout over a hemispherical surface for decades. It has been an effective test used in a 
variety of applications to qualify main charge materials evaluate different boosters and 
compare  different  detonators.  It  is  not  without  its  shortfalls  however.  It  only  images  a 
small  portion  of  the  explosive  and  requires  very  precise  alignment  and  camera 
requirements to make sense of the results. Asymmetry in explosive behavior cannot be 
pinpointed  or  evaluated  effectively.  A  new  diagnostic  has  been  developed  where  fiber 
optics covering the surface of the explosive yield a 3D representation of the detonation 
wave  behavior  of  a  hemisphere.  Precise  timing  mapping  of  the  detonation  over  the 
hemispherical surface is generated which can be converted to detonation wave breakout 
behavior  using  Huygens  wave  reconstruction.  This  paper  describes  tests  using  two 
geometries hemispheres and cylinders. Hemispheres are represented by a suite of tests on 
a  Conventional  High  Explosive  CHE  system  and  discussion  of  how  the  test  was 
developed for CHEs contrasting previous work on Insensitive High Explosives IHEs. 
The results of these tests will describe the effects on detonation wave breakout symmetry 
when  an  inert  gap  is  placed  between  the  detonator  and  booster.  Cylindrical  tests  are 
represented by a series of tests performed on the initiation train in a cylindrical geometry. 
The intent was to investigate side lighting via cutback tests and to investigate polar push. 
These tests were comprised of various boosters into PBX 9502 main charge. The results 
of these tests were compared to FLAG models and the agreement has been found to be 
When  considering  the  performance  of  an 
initiation  train  the  behavior  of  all  components 
detonator  booster  main-charge  is  critical  to 
evaluate. Historically the Onionskin Snowball and 
Half-Peach have been the tests used to investigate 
train  performance  detonation  wave 
breakout  timing  and  shape  over  the  surface  of  a 
hemispherical charge. This test while widely used 
is  effective  but  not  without 
shortcomings. It only images a small portion of the 
explosive and requires very precise alignment and 
camera requirements to make sense of the results. 
in  explosive  behavior  cannot  be 
pinpointed or evaluated effectively 1. 
A  timing  map  of  the  entire  charge  surface  is 
desirable  and  a  solution  evaluating  hemispheres 
and cylinders will be described.  
Figure 1 The Onionskin test is shown on the left. The breakout is imaged from the pole with mirrors on the side showing the 
equatorial breakout. While an entire hemisphere is available only a thin slit is actually imaged. The streak is shown on the bottom 
Hemispherical Tests 
behavior  a  3D  representation  of  the  entire 
surface  was  needed. 
configuration  the  camera  uses  a  narrow  slit 
which  causes  the  bulk  of  the  surface  to  be 
obscured  Figure  1.  The  novel  test  developed 
called  the  Furball  uses  fiber  optics  arrayed 
over  the  surface  and  oriented  into  a  planar 
surface.  This  surface  is  then  imaged  with  the 
streak camera Figure 2. The arrival of light is 
used to measure detonation wave properties and 
timing.  Previous  Furball  tests  were  conducted 
using PBX 9502 which required the use of paint 
to  create  a  flash  for  imaging  purposes  67.  It 
was  expected  PBX  9501  would  supply  more 
light possibly oversaturating the streak image so 
care  was  taken  to  evaluate  this  effect  before 
proceeding to the tests.  
Several  practice  shots  were  conducted 
to  evaluate  light  saturation  fiber  optic  image 
edge  sharpness  fiber  optic  material  choice  and 
treatment.  The  final  shot 
configuration was chosen to optimize the quality 
of  the  streak  image.  Figure  3  shows  the  results 
from  a  practice  shot  where  fiber  end  treatment 
was  evaluated  coated  with  aluminum  and 
uncoated. The goal of the shot was to minimize 
prelight and demonstrate a sharp edge on leading 
fiber  optic  edge  seen  on  the  streak  image.  The 
aluminum  fiber  end  treatment  was  investigated 
to  eliminate  prelight  force  the  light  flash  to 
assume a largely circular shape and minimize the 
existence of long tails avoiding the overwriting 
of data. Aluminum coating was largely a success. 
The  circular  shape  of 
maintained  the  same  size  and  geometry  of  the 
fiber  in  the  still  image.  The  leading  edge  was 
Unfortunately  this  technique  was  not  used  due 
to challenges with actually coating the fibers in 
the equipment available.  
Figure 2 The hemispherical charge potion of the Furball test 
is shown on the left. Fibers arrayed over the surface capture 
the breakout light which is imaged on a plate by the streak 
camera shown on the right. 
Figure  3  Shown  is  a  fiber  end  treatment  experiment.  The 
goal was to minimize prelight. The top row shows aluminum 
coated ends the bottom shows uncoated ends. While this did 
improve  the  image  clarity  application  of  the  Al  was 
impractical  in  the  available  coating  chamber.  Repeatability 
was an issue. Angling the ends to create an air gap worked as 
well so the Al coating was abandoned for the time being.  
Angled  Fiber  ends.  Barco 
Flatter U-shaped streak 
12  mil  thick  one  side  17 
mil  thick  other  side.  Wshaped streak 
3 mil thick one side 8 mil 
thick other side. W-shaped 
Table 1 Experimental series results. TBO is Time to BreakOut FBA is First Breakout Angle and TBT is Total Breakout Time.
For timing purposes the shot included a 
fiducial  detonator  to  establish  time  zero.  This 
indicates  the  time  when  the  detonator  initiates 
and  is  expected  to  be  largely  identical  to  the 
detonator in the shot itself. Four fiber optics are 
oriented on the fiducial. On the streak record the 
light associated with these points represents time 
zero  and  relative  time  from  these  points  to  the 
first  line  of  fiber  data  represents  the  amount  of 
time  the  detonation  takes  to traverse  the  charge 
and breakout on the surface. Time data for each 
point relative to where it was originally located 
is collected and used to evaluate the temporal 3D 
response of the experiment. 
Gaps  of  Sylgard  184  were  included  to 
effect the surface breakout. Shims of appropriate 
thickness  were  used  to  create  the  gap  space 
around  the  detonator  well  filling  the  well  with 
Sylgard  and  inserting  the  detonator  until  it  was 
resting on the shims. Placing shims of different 
thicknesses  on  either  side  of  the  detonator  well 
Two  practice  shots  were  fired 
evaluate  shot  design  and  lighting.  Fibers  were 
glued in place using super glue. The glue wicked 
into the holes and down to the HE surface. This 
compromised the clarity of the streak record. The 
glue was changed to Barco Bond which did not 
wick into fiber holes and the streak image was 
improved.  The  fibers  were  polished  flat  and 
coated  with  aluminium  shot  1  or  silver  paint 
shot  2.  Neither  coating  worked  well.  Angled 
fiber ends were chosen to mitigate these lighting 
issues.  A  rod  was  used  to  connect  the  viewing 
plane to the shot itself. Shot 1 used a straight rod 
placing the HE in the same plane as the camera 
image plane. This caused excessive lighting from 
the  fireball.  Shot  2  used  an  angled  rod  which 
dropped  the  HE  out  of  the  viewing  plane  and 
mitigated fireball lighting issues. 
 A  total  of  9  shots  were  fired  this 
included  two  practice  shots  which  were  not 
analyzed  owing  to  various  shortcomings  of  the 
streak  records.  Table  1  describes  the  tests 
conducted.  Time  to  first  break  out  TBO 
describes  the  elapsed  time  from  the  fiducial 
detonator  initiating  to  the  earliest  break  out  on 
the surface of the main charge. It represents the 
shortest  amount  of  time  the  wave  takes  to 
traverse  the  hemisphere.  First  break  out  angle 
radial  angle  which 
corresponds  to  the  shortest  elapsed  time.  Total 
Figure 4 Visualization top and streak record below of three shots. Left is a baseline shot shot 3. Center is shot 8 a 
canted shot and right is a thick flat gap shot 7. The symmetry and timing differences of the different configurations are 
easy to compare using the visualization tool. Shot 3 exhibits a U-shape. Shot 7 exhibits a W-shape. Axes in upper 
pictures are degrees. Color legend represents time with red being early time and blue is late time. 
breakout  time  TBT  represents  the  amount  of 
time from the first breakout until the entire main 
charge is consumed. 
Observing  the  changes  in  TBO  FBA 
thickness  reveal  some 
and  TBT  with  gap 
demonstrate timing associated with the charge in 
its  intended  configuration.  The  time  required  to 
corner turn and consume the shot is the greatest 
of  any  of  the  shots  fired.  Figures  4  and  5 
indicative  of  a  Conventional  High  Explosive 
CHE. The fact that it breaks out first at the pole 
is  related  to  the  shape  of  the  charge  where  the 
shortest  distance  is  from  the  center  of  the 
detonator  to  the  pole  and  the  shock  supplied 
from the detonator would run-up to steady state 
detonation  in  the  normal  direction  most  ably. 
More interesting aspects arise when the inert gap 
is  placed  between  the  detonator  and  the  HE.  A 
thin gap shot 5 and 9 takes longer to first break 
out but maintains the U-shape of CHE breakout 
thin  gap  of  Sylgard  does 
effectively  retard  the  detonation  of  the  HE 
somewhat and flattens the first breakout angle to 
a larger area but retarding the detonation in the 
normal  direction  allows  the  side  lighting  to 
catch  up  slightly  and  the  total  time  for  the 
whole charge to be consumed is reduced. Further 
thickening  of  the  Sylgard  gap  shot  6  and  8 
dramatically  affect  the  breakout  shape  to  a  W 
suggestive  of  wave  shapes  seen  in  Insensitive 
High  Explosives  IHEs.  The  thicker  Sylgard 
effectively  retards  the  wave  in  the  normal 
direction and the wave propagates more easily to 
the  side  first.  The  total  time  is  dramatically 
reduced  with  consumption  of  the  entire  charge 
occurring  in  a  significantly  smaller  time.  The 
breakout wave is flatter and the FBA occurs over 
a large area. A very thick gap Shot 7 slows the 
center  down  significantly.  Side  lighting  is  the 
prevalent  mechanism  for  initiating  the  main 
All shots are plotted together in Figure 
5 clearly demonstrating the timing changes with 
gap thickness. While this reduces a 3D image to 
2D  it  allows  easy  comparison.  It  can  be  seen 
how side lighting is largely identical despite gap 
thickness.  The  time  retardation  due  to  gap 
thickness can be seen. The flat breakout wave of 
the 16 mil gap and the 12-18 mil canted shot are 
results.  A  more  effective 
visualization  tool  was  developed  allowing  a 
Figure  4.  Red  signifies  early  time  blue  late 
Figure 5 Furball and Onionskin tests from the same series 
plotted together. Dotted lines are furball data sets solid lines 
Onionskins. The shots are not completely analogous 
different gap thicknesses were fired in the onionskins but the 
timing and wave shape results are consistent.  
Because  this  paper  is  arguing  that  this 
diagnostic  may  be  an  improvement  over  the 
Onionskin  comparison  of  the  Onionskin  data 
and the Furball data can be seen in Figure 5. The 
agreement  between  the  two  styles  of  shots  is 
extremely  favorable  and  the  fact  that  given 
diagnostic  differences  similar  responses  are 
observed lends credence to this test series.  The 
gap thickness effects are real and reproducible. 
Given  the  apparent  success  in  imaging 
the  detonation  wave  on  hemispheres  other 
geometries  were  considered.  The  cylinder  was 
chosen for a recent set on tests where the metric 
of  interest  was  dead  zone  propagation  in  PBX 
9502 along the equator.  
The prevalence and effect of dead zones 
is not easy to observe. The best way to observe 
this  phenomenon  is  with  proton  radiography 
PRad but this diagnostic was not available in 
time  for  these  tests.  A  cutback  style  test  was 
devised  where  equatorial  breakout  behavior 
could be observed at different diameters and this 
interesting  propagation 
behavior  if  it  existed.  For  these  tests  three 
booster  materials  were  considered  at 
different  heights  with  two  different  diameters. 
Table 2 shows the test matrix. 
Table  2  Test  matrix  for  cylindrical  tests.  Variables  were 
booster  height  material  and  main  charge  diameter.  The 
overall height and booster diameter were held constant. 
Booster diameter was held constant at 25mm and 
over  all  charge  height  was  constant.  The  main 
charge  for  these  experiments  was  PBX  9502 
pressed to a density of 1.89 gcc. It was expected 
a  thicker  booster  could  overdrive  the  pole  and 
booster  candidates  where  chosen  to  vary  this 
polar  push.  It  was  expected  PBX  9501  would 
work  well  but  offer  a  very  strong  push.  PBX 
9407  would  offer  a  slightly  softer  push  and 
LAX-133 97 DAAF 3 FK-800 would offer 
the  softest  push.  Comparing  the  timing  at  the 
pole  to  detonation  spreading  at  the  equator 
would  be  used  to  rank  the  booster  candidates. 
arrangement with a 5mm PBX 9501 into 5mm of 
PBX 9407. This was expected to slow down the 
polar push in a favorable way.  
These  configurations  were  modelled 
pre-shot using FLAG ALE3D and reactive burn 
where all behavior was at steady state. When the 
data put into the visualization tool a comparison 
between  ideal  behavior  and  the  real  data  was 
generated Figure 11. 
Figure 6 Cylindrical fixture holding the fiber optics to the 
surface of the HE. Camera plate is the same as found in 
hemispherical tests. 
Post shot the data and the ALE3D and 
FLAG models were compared and the agreement 
was  very  favorable  except  for  one  booster 
configuration.  For  both  main  charge  diameters 
LAX-133  at  5mm  produced  very  sparse  polar 
data. It was predicted by the models this would 
light the PBX 9502 and while the data did show 
some detonation it was significantly delayed at 
the  pole  and  exhibited  less  light  than  expected. 
When compared to the LAX-133 10mm booster 
shot the results are very different. This shot did 
appear to initiate correctly. 
A total of twelve shots were fired. The 
breakout of each shot was symmetric. To easily 
compare  them  a  line  of  points  from  equator  to 
equator through the pole was chosen and plotted 
together.  These  can  be  seen  in  figure  7  for  all 
35mm shots. A detail of these data can be seen in 
figure  8.  This  was  used  to  compare  timing  for 
each booster arrangement and these curves were 
used to estimate a polar pressure using ALE3D 
Figure  7  All  35mm  shot  results  plotted  together  to  allow 
timing comparison and equatorial break out comparison. 
Figure  8  Timing  detail  ataround  the  pole  where  booster 
differences  can  be  seen.  5mm  thick  boosters  of  PBX  9501 
and  PBX  9407  are  very  similar  suggesting  the  behavior  of 
PBX 9502 is largely observed.  X-axis depicts fiber location 
y-axis depicts time in microseconds. 
Two aspects of Figure 7 are interesting the pole 
and the equator. The shape of the plot represents 
fiber number on the x axis with the first and last 
seven  representing  the  sides  and  the  middle  17 
representing the flat top. The fixture design can 
be  seen  in  Figure  6.  There  is  no  data  at  the 
corners so this is not representing a continuous 
line.  The  curvature  from  shot  to  shot  at  the 
equator first two and last two points of figure 7 
gives  some  indication  as  to  the  side  lighting 
effectiveness.  When  each  booster  is  plotted  at 
both  diameters  equatorial  detonation  spreading 
behavior  can  be  compared.  Even  LAX-133  at 
5mm 1-133-5 which fails to light at the pole 
side lights effectively.   
Figure 8 can be used with the models to 
ascertain  whether  the  PBX  9502  is  relaxed  and 
largely at steady state when correlated with ideal 
model  behavior  where  run  up  and  overdriven 
states are not considered. One example 5mm of 
PBX  9407  is  shown  in  Figure  12.  Using  DSD 
burn tables and BdzilAslam  values for 9501  
the AslamHill values for 9502.  For 9407 and 
the DSD values for 9501 but lowered the Dcj to 
match the detonation velocities for 9407. 
Figure  9  Cutback  test  results  for  PBX  9407  at  35  and 
45mm. The behavior at the equator is represented by the first 
two and last two points. A growth in the level of curvature 
may represent dead zone propagation. The data suggests no 
Figure 10 Visualization of the PBX 9407 5mm booster data 
in 3D. No data exists at the corners. Red is early time.  Blue 
is late time. Symmetry and lack of curvature at the equator is 
Figure 11 Residual of data and ideal model. Positive value 
bluer represents the data being ahead of the model negative 
values redder represent the data lagging the model.  
With  regards  to  dead  zones  in  PBX 
9502  it  was  expected  that  a  significant  lag 
would be observed in the equatorial region if a 
dead zone were present. Observation of a lag on 
the  35mm  cylinder  any  subsequent  and 
increasing  lag  on  the  45mm  cylinder  may 
indicate the propagation of a dead zone. Neither 
type  of  lag  was  observed.  The  comparison  of 
PBX 9407 response at 35mm and 45mm can be 
As  the  detonation  characteristics  of 
these  shots  is  a  3D  quantity  observation  of 
symmetry  or  lack-thereof  is  crucial.  Figure  10 
characterize  the  symmetry.  Overall  symmetry 
and equatorial behavior are easily observed.  
in  a  visualization 
Remembering that the approach of these 
shots  was  to  compare  polar  behavior  among 
boosters and investigate dead zone propagation 
these  results  have  met  expectations.  Simply 
comparing the polar timing and comparing it to 
very crude ideal models can give some indication 
whether the HE is overdriven or not. Comparing 
equatorial  data  at  different  main  charge 
thicknesses  allows  observation  of  dead  zone 
phenomena if present.  
This  shot  series  produced  very  nice 
data.  Questions  can  arise  with  the  results  and 
analysis techniques. As a result it is desirable to 
observe these same phenomena with models and 
use  them  for  prediction  in  future  tests.  Several 
approaches  to  modelling  this  shot  design  were 
used. All will be reported in a future publication 
in much greater detail. One example can be seen 
in Figure 12. This demonstrates the comparison 
of DSD to the data. The mesh resolution was 50 
Figure 12 Data blue compared to DSD model red. 
Agreement is very good. Optically Measuring the Invisible Explosive Impulse 
Matthew M. Biss and Kevin L. McNesby 
Lethality Divisions Energetic Technology Branch 
U.S. Army Research Laboratory APG MD 21005 
Abstract. An experimental technique is investigated to optically measure the explosive 
impulse  produced  by  detonating  spherical  laboratory-scale  charges  in  air.  Explosive 
impulse  has  historically  been  calculated  from  the  integration  of  temporal  pressure 
histories obtained via piezoelectric pressure transducers. The presented technique instead 
combines  schlieren  flow  visualization  and  high-speed  digital  imaging  to  optically 
measure  explosive  impulse  at  numerous  radial  locations  limited  only  by  sensor 
resolution and recording rates. Prior to an explosive event schlieren system calibration is 
performed  via  calibrated  light-ray  refractions  and  resulting  digital  image  intensities. 
Laboratory-scale  energetic-material  charges  are  detonated  in  the  test  section  of  the 
schlieren  system  and  imaged  using  a  high-speed  digital  camera.  Image  intensities 
downstream  of  the  shock  wave  are  translated  into  a  temporal  density  profile  and 
subsequently  converted  to  a  pressure-versus-time  profile.  Through  integration  of  this 
profile  over  the  positive  pressure  duration  the  explosive  impulse  is  determined  for  a 
given radial location. 
fielding  a  munition  energetic 
potentialperformance  on  a  target.  Performance  is 
characterized  through  experimental  measurement 
the  detonation-  and  blast-wave  properties 
produced  in  air.  The  detonation  properties  of 
interest  i.e.  pressure  velocity  particle  velocity 
and density depend upon chemical composition of 
the  energetic  material  and  vary  with  pressing 
density.  The  detonation  wave  upon  reaching  the 
energetic  materialair  interface  is  transferred 
into  the  surrounding  air  as  a  radially  outward 
propagating blast wave. The outward propagating 
blast  wave  transports  the  mechanical  energy  or 
damage  potential  produced  by 
material.  Thus  radial  measurements  of  the  blast 
wave  peak  pressure  and  explosive  impulse  are 
gathered for performance characterization.  
An ideal explosive pressure versus time record 
measured  at  a  fixed radial  standoff  distance  from 
the charge center is shown in Figure 1. The figure 
experienced by a stationary sensor upon passage of 
a blast wave. Explosive impulse at the fixed sensor 
is  defined  as  the  area  abovebeneath  the  pressure 
versus  time  record  with  respect  to  atmospheric 
pressure  P0.  As  shown  the  trace  contains  both  a 
positive  pressures  above  atmospheric  pressure 
pressures  below  atmospheric 
pressure phase of impulse. Here only the positive 
characterization  purposes  as it  is  generally  orders 
of magnitude larger than the negative phase.1 The 
positive  pressure  phases  duration  T  is  defined 
from  the  peak  shock  wave  pressure  Ps  at  the 
shock  wave  time  of  arrival  ta  through  its  decay 
down  to  atmospheric  pressure  at  time  ta    T. 
Thus  the  positive  phase  of  explosive  impulse  is 
defined  as  the  integral  of  the  positive  pressure 
phase over its duration Equation 1. 
Fig. 1. Ideal explosive pressure trace.  
blast-wave  measurements 
traditionally  gathered  from  full-scale  kilogramrange charges having masses ranging from 1-105 
kg.2 Explosive scaling laws are later applied to the 
experimental  results  for  comparison  between 
charge  masses.  Experiments  measure  the  shock 
waves  temporal  pressure  history  at  fixed  radialstandoff  positions  using  piezoelectric  pressure 
transducers.  Being  mechanically  actuated  these 
transducers possess a characteristic finite response 
time that inhibits their ability to accurately respond 
to a discontinuous signal such as a shock wave.3-6 
To  more  easily  manage  these  data  multiple 
empirical  smoothing  curves  have  been  developed 
by previous authors.1 However the need for these 
empirically  based  curves  only  increases  the  error 
in the measurement.  
Recently  laboratory-based  researchers  have 
extended  the  explosive  scaling  laws  validity  for 
peak  shock  wave  pressure  from  kilogram-range 
charges  down  to  the  gram  and  even  milligram 
their  research  optical  flow 
shadowgraph etc. are combined with high-speed 
digital  cameras  to  track  the  radial  shock  wave 
propagation rate permitting a continuous radially 
varying  peak  shock  wave  pressure  profile  to  be 
equation.  This  extension  down  to  the  laboratory 
scale  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  a  highly 
traditional  air-blast  experiments  as  it  provides  a 
non-intrusive  continuous  profile  compared  to  the 
intrusive  point  measurements  obtained  by 
the  Rankine-Hugoniot 
pressure transducer histories at both the laboratory 
and  full  scale  as  no  optical  characterization 
method has been explored. In response the present 
research  aims  to  extend  the  utility  of  laboratoryscale  air-blast  characterization  by  developing  an 
determine  the  explosive  impulse  produced  by  the 
detonation of spherical gram-range charges. Streak 
images are captured of the explosive event using a 
digital  high-speed  camera  and  schlieren  flow 
visualization system. Images are digitally analyzed 
to  optically  determine 
history of the explosively driven shock wave as a 
function  of  shock  wave  radius  yielding  the 
explosive impulse.  
Experimental Methods 
Centrally  initiated  laboratory-scale  spherical 
charges  are  incorporated  to  eliminate  the  critical 
diameter  effect  associated with  energetic  material 
detonations.9  Spherical  charges  possessed  a 
centrally positioned right-circular-cylinder void to 
accommodate  an  RP-3  exploding  bridgewire 
tetranitrate PETN Figure 2.  
Fig.  2.  Spherical  charge  with  RP-3  EBW 
cyclotrimethylene trinitramine RDX pressed to a 
density  of  1.77  gcm3.  The  assembled  charge 
masses  and  their  respective  densities  measured 
using  a  Micrometrics  AccuPyc  1330  gas 
pycnometer are tabulated in Table 1. 
Table 1. Experimental charges detonated 
Digital High-speed Schlieren Visualization 
Spherical  charges  are  detonated  in  the  test 
section  of  a  Z-type  schlieren  system  to  optically 
track the explosively driven shock wave radius as 
a function of time Figure 3. The schlieren system 
components  are  twin  24.75  cm  f5  parabolic 
mirrors  a  500-W  mercury-xenon  Hg-Xe  arclamp  light  source  NewportOriel  Instruments  a 
Photron  SA.5  8-bit  digital  high-speed  camera 
Photron  USA  Inc.  and  a  linear-graded  filter 
DSC  Laboratories.  A  linear-graded  filter  is 
chosen  for  the  current  application  in  place  of  the 
traditional  schlieren  knife  edge  due  to  the  high 
refractive  indices  expected.  The  graded  filter 
provides  several  advantages  over  a  knife-edge 
cutoff  including  1  minimal  diffraction  effects 
2  sharper  schlieren  images  having  increased 
spatial  resolution  3  extended  physical  cutoff 
exhibiting less vibration sensitivity.10 
4  a  broader  measuring 
Fig. 3. Z-schlieren flow visualization system with 
linear graded filter cutoff and pencil gage pressure 
A  pencil  gage  pressure  transducer  is  placed 
outside the schlieren system test section to gather 
the side-on static temporal pressure history of the 
propagating  blast  wave  for  comparison  to  the 
optical  measurement  Figure  3.  The  pressure 
transducer  is  a  PCB  Model  137A23  with  a 
measuring  range  of  345  kPa.    The  pencil  gage  is 
connected  to  a  PCB  signal  conditioner  Model 
483C and finally to a LeCroy oscilloscope Model 
6030A  with  a  sample  rate  of  1  MHz  signalconditioner limited.  
Schlieren  system  calibration  is  performed 
according  to  the  standard  photometric  method 
developed  by  Schardin.11  Placing  a  standard  lens 
50.8  mm  diameter  10  m  focal  length  in  the 
background  intensity  is  set  by  adjusting  the 
transverse position of the graded filter with respect 
to the optical axis. A calibration image is captured 
between the standard lens geometry and a refracted 
ray  of  light.12  The  image  is  captured  with  an 
exposure time equivalent to the exposure time for 
imaging the explosive event. A MATLAB script is 
used  to  calibrate  the  8-bit  digital  intensity  profile 
across the lens centerline. The intensity profile is 
generated  by  averaging  the  center  three  rows  of 
pixels across the lens to minimize the presence of 
artifacts  or  noise  in  the  image.  A  fourth-order 
polynomial  is  fit  to  this  intensity  profile  as  a 
lens  coordinate.  The 
polynomial  is  subsequently  converted  to  pixel 
intensity  as  a  function  of  the  refraction  angle  r 
thus  permitting  all  future  experimental  image 
intensity  values  to  be  converted  to  refraction 
Due  to  the  nature  of  the  schlieren  systems 
parallel light passing though a spherical blast field 
the measured refraction angles are path-integrated 
quantities.  As  such  a  deconvolution  of  the  data 
must  be  performed  prior  to  calculating  the  local 
refractive-index field generated by the blast wave. 
The implementation of centrally initiated spherical 
charges and Huygenss principle13 ensure the blast 
field  to  be  spherical  in  nature  and  a  onedimensional axisymmetric flow field. It should be 
noted  that  the  proposed  technique  is  limited  to 
radial  distances  greater  than  that  to  which  the 
contact  surface  of  detonation  product  gases 
expands  to  allow  a  proper  deconvolution  of  the 
the  normalized  refractive 
Research  conducted  by  Dasch  demonstrated 
that the deconvolved field for path-integrated data 
taken  at  equally  spaced  radial  positions  over  N 
intervals  is  producible  using  only  weighted  sums 
of the data divided by the spacing interval.14 This 
deconvolution  is  represented  by  Equation  2 
difference at time tm and a distance of ri ir from 
the center of the object of interest Dij contains the 
coefficients  Equations  3  and  4  and  mj  is  the 
refraction angle. Indices i and j correspond to the 
data  points  varying  from  1  to  N1.15  Kolhe  and 
developed and found the two-point Abel inversion 
measurements  while  minimizing  experimental 
error propagation.15 
where Aij and Bij are 
After  deconvolution  of  the  refraction  angle 
data  the  refractive  index    is  calculated  from   
according  to  Equation  5  where  0  is  the 
index  at  ambient  conditions.  The 
Gladstone-Dale  law  is  applied  to  the  refractive 
index to determine the radial density gradient  of 
the  air  downstream  of  the  shock  wave  Equation 
6.  The  Gladstone-Dale  coefficient  k  is  0.226 
cm3g  for  air  at  ambient  conditions.  Calculated 
densities    are  converted  to  pressures  P  through 
the  use  of  the  ideal  gas  law  Equation  7. 
Measured pressure profiles for the present research 
are for shock waves travelling at Mach 3 or less 
thus  air  is  assumed  to  behave  as  an  ideal  gas 
In  order  to  calculate  a  pressure  a  temporal 
temperature  profile  is  required  at  each  radial 
standoff  distance.  Temperatures  decay  profile 
measurement.  Thus  various  assumptions  have 
been  invoked  to  simplify  its  handling.  Previous 
research  by  Hargather  and  Biss  assumed  the 
temperature profile downstream of the shock wave 
to be constant and equal to the shock-heated value 
for calculating the positive pressure duration from 
laboratory-scale  PETN  charges.816  Though 
turned  out  to  be  a  rather  good  assumption  for 
determining  the  positive  pressure  duration  the 
temperature must decay at a finite rate in order to 
properly  calculate  the  pressure.  As  an  initial 
estimate a triangular temperature decay profile is 
assumed  for  the  present  research  Equation  8. 
Where the peak temperature Tmax at a given radial 
standoff  distance  is  determined  by  the  normal 
shock  relation  Equation  9.  The  shock  wave 
Mach  number  M  is  determined  by  measuring  the 
shock  wave  radius  as  a  function  of  time  and 
applying Deweys radius versus time profile to the 
data.17  The profile is differentiated with respect to 
time  and  divided  by  the  ambient  sound  speed 
thereby  yielding  the  shock  wave  Mach  number 
versus  radius  profile  for  additional  background 
see Biss and Settles.7 Additionally knowledge of 
the  radial  shock  wave  Mach  number  allows  an 
accurate  determination  of  the  radial  peak  shock 
wave  pressure  profile.  The  minimum  temperature 
Tmin  is  determined  by  forcing  the  pressure  to 
atmospheric  at  the  conclusion  of  the  positive 
pressure  duration  Equation  10.    The  radially 
varying  positive  pressure  duration  T 
determined  according  to  previously  published 
methods.8  16  Finally  the  spatiotemporal  pressure 
map is calculated using the ideal gas law with the 
optically  measured  density  map  and  calculated 
spatiotemporal temperature map. 
Results and Discussion 
Optical Explosive Impulse Measurement 
Prior  to  conducting  each  experiment  a  static 
image  of  the  standard  lens  positioned  in  the  test 
section  of  the  schlieren  system  was  recorded  to 
determine the radial intensity profile produced by 
the  linear  graded  filter  and  provide  a  calibration 
length scale.  Images were captured by the Photron 
SA.5 at 300 kfps 1 s exposure and a resolution 
of  832  x  16  pixels.  Images  possessed  a  spatial 
resolution  of  2.661e-4  mpixel.  Using  the  central 
three-row  average  of  pixels  from  the  calibration 
image  a  fourth-order  polynomial  was  fit  to  the 
lens  intensity  profile  Figure  4.  The  profile  was 
subsequently converted to represent intensity as a 
function  of  refraction  angle.  The  intensity  profile 
was  found  to  span  approximately  95  of  the 
cameras usable dynamic range.  
Background intensity
Fig. 4. Pixel intensity versus radius profile across 
It was determined that the charge needed to be 
positioned  outside  of  the  test  section  as  the  test 
section size was limited by the mirrors. This was 
due  to  the  shock  wave  not  separating  from  the 
contact surface within the limited test section area 
and therefore not allowing a visualization of only 
the  propagating  shock  wave  in  air.  Thus  the 
explosive  charge  was  positioned  at  a  known 
standoff radius and laser aligned with the center of 
the  mirror  and  pencil  gage.  Explosive  charges 
were detonated and the central row of pixels from 
each image was concatenated with respect to time 
to  create  a  spatiotemporal  intensity  map  of  the 
shock  wave  Figure  5.  As  shown  the  primary 
shock  wave  propagates  from  a  starting  radius  of 
0.15  m  at  0.1  ms  while  the  secondary  shock 
wave  becomes  visible  at  later  times.  For  each 
experiment  the  shock  wave  radius  profile  was 
empirically developed radius versus time profile17 
was  fit  to  the  measured  data  and  converted  to  a 
shock wave Mach number versus radius profile.7  
refraction    using  Equation 
index difference .  This was converted to an index 
subsequently to a density  according to Equation 
6.  Peak  radial  temperatures  were  calculated  at 
each pixel location using the previously generated 
shock  wave  Mach  number  versus  radius  profile 
and  Equation  9.  Temporal  temperature  profiles 
were  subsequently  calculated  at  each  pixel 
location Equations 810. Combining these with 
the density map and Equation 7 a spatiotemporal 
pressure  map  gage  pressure  was  determined 
Figure  6.  As  shown  the  primary  shock  wave 
exhibits  a  decaying  trend  both  radially  outward 
and  in  time.  Prior  to  the  shock  wave  arrival  the 
ambient  air  is  at  atmospheric  gage  pressure  or  0 
Fig. 5. Spatiotemporal digital intensity map. 
The spatiotemporal shock wave intensity map 
was converted to a map of refraction angles using 
the calibration profile. In order to properly perform 
a deconvolution on the refraction angle data it was 
necessary  to  apply  padding  to  the  image  to 
represent  the  radial  standoff  region  not  visible  in 
the  schlieren  test  section.  This  was  accomplished 
intensity  value  determined  from  the  calibration 
image for the known radial standoff distance the 
value  could  have  just  as  well  been  padded  with 
zeros  as  the  deconvolution  is  only  affected  by 
radial distances larger than the point of calculation. 
A two-point Abel deconvolution was performed on 
the  refraction  angle  map  according  to  Equations 
24 yielding a map of the normalized refractive 
Fig.  6.  Spatiotemporal  pressure  map  Note  all 
pressures are gage pressures. 
A  series  of  pressure  profiles  were  extracted 
from  the  pressure  map  at  various  radial  standoff 
distances and plotted with respect to time Figure 
7.  As  shown  the  traces  exhibit  the  characteristic 
blast wave profile a sharp increase to peak shock 
wave  pressure  followed  by  an  exponential  decay 
back to atmospheric pressure and a negative phase 
pressure  region  followed  by  a  second  sharp 
increase  and  decay  representing  the  secondary 
Atmospheric Pressure
Fig.  7.  Optically  measured  temporal  pressure 
traces  at  specified  radial  standoff  distances  from 
the  charge  center  Note  all  pressures  are  gage 
Optical  pressure  profiles  for  the  specified 
pressure  gage  standoffs  were  plotted  against  the 
pencil gage traces for both experiments Figure 8.  
As shown the calculated optical pressure profiles 
were in good agreement with the measured pencil 
gage  profiles  however  both  methods  failed  to 
capture the optically determined peak shock wave 
pressure. For the pencil gage this was attributed to 
its  inherent  nearly-10  s  response-time  delay 
whereas for the optical trace it was hypothesized 
that this was due to inadequate camera resolution 
temporal and spatial. As stated optical pressure 
measurements were gathered at 300 kHz for every 
radial  pixel  location.  As  shown  by  Figure  8  the 
optical  pressure  measurement  possessed  a  faster 
response time than the pencil gage but was slower 
than  the  generally  accepted  sampling  rate  of  a 
MHz  for  blast  wave  pressure  measurements. 
the  current  Photron  camera 
capabilities a compromise between frame rate and 
spatial resolution was necessary and therefore 300 
kHz  was  decided  upon.  Spatially  the  images 
possessed sub-millimeter pixel resolution 2.661e-4 
mpixel.  This  was  capable  of  being  increased 
through use of a higher focal length camera lens 
however  again  a  compromise  was  necessary  in 
order to capture a reasonable radial range of shock 
wave  propagation  and  spatial  resolution.  Section 
3.2 further addresses the effects of camera spatial 
Pencil gage r  0.23 m
Pencil gage r  0.28 m
Optical peak r  0.23 m
Optical peak r  0.28 m
Fig.  8.  Temporal  pressure 
between pencil gages optically calculated profiles 
and the optical peak shock wave pressure for both 
Note  all  pressures  are  gage 
The  calculated  explosive  impulses  Equation 
1  for  the  pencil  gage  and  optical  pressure 
measurements  from  experiment  14009-2  were 
tabulated  in  Table  2.  A  difference  of  only  14 
was  determined  between  the  two  measurements. 
The experimental uncertainty was estimated to be 
5  for  the  pencil  gage  pressure  measurements. 
The  experimental  uncertainty  for 
explosive  impulse  measurement  was  determined 
according  to  previous  studies.1518  The  average 
uncertainty  in  the  calculated  refraction  angle  was 
determined  to  be  3.4.  This  translated  to  a  final 
uncertainty  of  6  for 
the  optical  explosive 
impulse measurements.   
Table 2. Calcuated explosive impulse 
Flat-plate Boundary Layer 
To test the previously stated spatial resolution 
hypothesis a heated-flat-plate experiment similar 
to  that  conducted  by  Bigger  and  Hargather  was 
conducted  to  analyze  the  free-convective  thermal 
boundary  layer  produced.1219  Only  a 
explanation is provided in the present manuscript 
however  the  previously  mentioned  references 
provide  an  in-depth  and  detailed  experimental 
The  experiment  consists  of  heating  an 
aluminium plate here 0.152 m x 0.304 m x 0.013 
m  to  a  constant  temperature  with  a  resistiveheating  blanket  and  variac  controller.  The  heated 
plate  was  placed  in  the  vertical  orientation  in  the 
schlieren test section to image the free-convective 
previously  defined  methods  the  refraction  angles 
across the thermal boundary layer were calculated 
from  the  pixel  intensities  and  compared  with  the 
exact similarity solution.20 
A  Canon  EOS  Rebel  T1i  8-bit  handheld 
digital single lens reflex dSLR camera having a 
sensor  resolution  of  15  MPixels  4752  x  3168 
pixels  was  used  to  compare  with  the  high-speed 
Photron  sensor  resolution  1024  x  1024  pixels. 
Flat-plate  boundary  layer  schlieren  images  were 
taken  and  analyzed  with  both  cameras.  The  plate 
maintained  a  surface  temperature  of  327    3  K 
with a surrounding ambient temperature of 288  1 
K for the Canon image and a surface temperature 
of 329  3 K and surrounding ambient temperature 
of  286    1  K  for  the  Photron  image.  Calibration 
images  were  taken  with  both  cameras  refraction 
angles across the boundary layer were calculated 
and results compared to the similarity solution. As 
shown in Figure 9 the refraction angles measured 
exceptionally  well  3  difference  with  the 
similarity  solution.  The  refraction  angle  profile 
measured by the Photron compared well with the 
similarity  solution  with  the  exception  of  near  the 
surface of the plate where large thermal gradients 
existed. It may be concluded that the resolution of 
the high-speed Photron camera was inadequate for 
resolving  the  flat-plate  thermal  boundary  layer 
and  therefore  would  most  certainly  have  been 
unable  to  resolve  the  peak  shock  wave  pressure 
and initial decay of the explosive impulse profile.   
the  handheld  dSLR 
Fig.  9.  Refraction 
angle  versus  distance 
comparison to similarity solution for across a flatplate  boundary  layer  using  handheld  dSLR  and 
high-speed cameras. 
impulse  produced  by 
detonated  in  air  was  investigated.  The  technique 
yielded  two-dimensional  pressure  maps  from 
temporal  pressure  histories  could  be 
extracted  at  each  radial  pixel  location.  Pressure 
maps  were  developed  from  digital  schlieren 
intensity maps that were converted using an Abel 
deconvolution Rankine-Hugoniot jump equations 
ideal gas law triangular temperature decay profile 
and  Schardins  standard  photometric  technique. 
Similar  to  pencil  gage  pressure  measurements 
derived  impulses  were found  to  be  insufficient  at 
resolving  the  peak  and  initial  pressure  decay 
profile.  Optically  derived  impulses  possessed  a 
faster temporal response time than the pencil gage. 
It  was  determined  that  the  digital  high-speed 
cameras resolution was insufficient to fully resolve 
the  temporal  pressure  history  near  the  peak 
increased  sensor  resolution  an  improved  impulse 
measurement  is  possible.  It  is  proposed  that  the 
experiments be re-conducted using a digital highspeed  streak  camera  that  provides  the  necessary 
resolution temporal and spatial for resolving the 
We would like to acknowledge the U.S. Army 
Research  Laboratorys  Lethality  Division  for 
funding  of  this  research.  We  would  like  to 
acknowledge Mr. Richard Benjamin Mr. William 
Sickels Mr. Ray Sparks Mr. Gene Summers and 
Mr. Ronnie Thompson of the Detonation Science 
Team  for  their  assistance  in  conducting  these 
experiments  and  Ms.  Susan  Corley  at  DSC 
Laboratories  for  providing  the  linearly  graded 
filters. Lastly we would like to acknowledge Dr. 
Michael  Hargather  at  New  Mexico  Tech  for  this 
thoughtful discussions.  A Spectrally Encoded Imaging Diagnostic
for Shock and Detonation Physics Experiments
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos New Mexico USA
Abstract. A novel diagnostic based on spectrally encoded imaging SEI has been developed for shock and detonation physics experiments. Depending on the conguration
of the system the diagnostic is capable of collecting surface breakout data analogous to
both streak and framing camera systems. The diagnostic also has several key features that
enable measurements beyond those of traditional camera systems. Firstly the information
collected from the shot is transmitted entirely through a single optical ber. Thus full optical access to the shot is not required. As a result the system can be elded in remote
or contained facilities such as gas guns and within fully enclosed experimental assemblies. Secondly the system is non-imaging in the traditional optics sense. Surface breakout
information can be collected from target surfaces of any shape and geometry unlike traditional optical systems that must contend with optical depth-of-eld issues. As a result the
potential applications of the new SEI diagnostic are endless.
A novel chromatism-based surface diagnostic
has been developed to supplant or replace several
conventional high speed imaging diagnostics including streak and framing cameras. The goal has
been to devise a simple ber-based system to acquire equivalent imaging data in any spatial target conguration.
Such a diagnostic will have
widespread use in shock and detonation physics
experiments where surface breakout measurements
are required. Applications include detonation performance testing to measure front curvature and
detonation velocity and inert shock wave experiments. Essentially any measurement that relies on
tracking the shock wave breakout along a material
interface is possible with the optical probe-based
system being developed.
Traditional measurements of such features have
required the use of specialized streak or framing
cameras as the gold standard. Typically lm-based
systems are preferred since the performance with
respect to resolution dynamic range and image distortion is still superior to that of any digital camera despite recent advances. Unfortunately high
speed instrumentation lm for these cameras is being produced less frequently by the few remaining manufacturers such as Kodak and is becoming exceedingly hard to acquire. In general the lm
must be purchased in bulk quantities in order to persuade a given manufacturer to do a dedicated production run. Recently the last remaining manufacturers are beginning to deny even these limited runs
and eventually the supply of instrumentation lm
will disappear as imaging technology fully transitions to strictly digital recording. Hard-to-acquire
expendable materials such as lm do not handicap
the newly developed technique and a number of
key additional advantages make the new diagnostic
more appealing than the technology offered by either traditional lm or electronic streak and framing
The technique is fundamentally non-imaging in
the traditional optics sense and simply collects
spectrally encoded information from a target surface that maps to the specic geometry of the target. As long as some amount of light from each
target location is collected the image of the surface can be determined as described below. Thus a
major advantage is that the probe can accurately detect surface breakouts along curved or oddly shaped
surfaces where standard optics are limited by the
associated depth-of-eld issues. This greatly increases the usefulness of the test especially for
surface measurements within enclosed assemblies
where complicated multi-point diagnostics are frequently elded to measure at best discontinuous surface breakout proles.
Along the same lines the probe can reduce the
overall number of diagnostics needed for certain
tests by taking measurements along multiple surfaces at once. For instance the probe can be set
up to measure the breakout velocity along the edge
of a rate stick while simultaneously measuring the
front curvature breakout at the end of the charge.
The technique inherently has a wide range of effective magnications determined by the probe illumination design and can accommodate very small
samples if necessary without the need for difcult
optical setups. This allows the technique to acquire
measurements that were previously impossible due
to imaging space access and range limitations. An
optical ber can be run a very long distance with the
only apparent disadvantage being pulse dispersion
in the ber. Fortuitously this very effect is essential
to the operation of the system.
So another key advantage of a non-imaging system is that the requirement for full optical access is
negated. Traditional camera elding requires clear
optical access to the shot. Since the entire system
is ber-based it can be fed into enclosed systems
and conned spaces such as contained ring vessels gun-type facilities or complicated shot assembly interiors. Even without optical access the di
Fig. 1. SEI target surface interrogation.
agnostic is able to collect surface imaging data that
was previously only possible through the use of direct imaging systems.
The system is based on the concept of spectrally
encoded imaging not traditional optical imaging.
This entails encoding the collected light from a
broad spectral illumination pattern with spatial target information where each point on the target corresponds to a particular wavelength. Spectrally rich
white light is transmitted along a single optical
ber to a specially designed probe that spectrally
disperses the light into a fan grid or other pattern
of wavelengths colors. The probe light can be generated via a white light supercontinuum laser or
a traditional non-coherent source though with limited power coherence and pulsing capabilities.
A simple prism diffraction grating virtually imaged phased array VIPA or tailored spatial disperser can be used as the projection element within
the probe. Electro-optic scanning devices can be
used to control beam dispersal in two dimensions if
desired. The probe beam appearing as an emitted
pattern of light is oriented towards the sample surface again without the requirement that the surface
be at. An illustration of a typical target surface illumination is shown in Figure 1. A linear dispersion
is shown that emulates a streak camera interrogation
of a sweeping shock wave along a surface.
projected lightreturn lightsweeping shockstreak axistarget surfaceThe probe also serves to collect the reected light
from the target. There are a number of considerations when designing a probe system. Collecting light along the same path is optimal and simple analogous to the elding of a typical photonic
Doppler velocimetry PDV probe. Depending on
the shape of the target surface this may not be possible. Odd shaped surfaces will scatter the illumination in different directions. Any amount of collectors can be used though all collectors must feed into
the same return ber. Convex surfaces will require
more collectors to gather the dispersed light. In general surface treatments may be required to ensure
light is scattered to the probe collectors from all locations on the target. The trade-off is that much of
the illumination light is lost to even multiple collectors. These non-specular surfaces correspondingly
require more illumination power or more efcient
collection designs to compensate.
the return spectra from the illuminated
painted target must be measured as a function of
time. The return spectrum of the reected light is
collected from the surface by the probe optics and
then sent to a system that functions as a high frequency optical spectrum analyzer. Note that the
output from a traditional spectrometer can be focused onto an electronic streak camera to achieve
this effect for a continuous measurement. More elegantly though the evolving spectra can be measured in pulsed or framing mode using the dispersive Fourier transform DFT technique.1 Via
this method it is possible to replace the expensive
combination of spectrometer and electronic streak
camera with a simple dispersive ber medium high
speed photodetector and high speed digitizer channel. Options for the dispersive ber medium include a long length of single-mode ber a shorter
length of dispersion compensating ber or a compact chirped ber Bragg grating FBG. The most
expensive component of the system is the high
speed digitizer. Fortuitously such instruments already exist in facilities with PDV capabilities.
Note that a DFT-based system requires the target illumination to be pulsed. Each pulse corresponds to an acquired frame from the camera
with the frame rate corresponding to the laser pulse
frequency. As the return pulses pass through the
dispersive ber element they are dispersed opti
cally and stretched in space. For a simple dispersion ber disparate wavelengths travel at different speeds within the optical ber due to inherent
glass dispersion. This is a common nuisance for the
telecommunications industry but is a benet for the
DFT system. For long enough bers the operation
is essentially an optical Fourier transform. By simply measuring the light amplitude as a function of
time at the end of the dispersive ber the optical
spectrum of each pulse can be accurately measured.
Each pulse exiting the ber correlates exactly to the
return light spectrum of the pulse reected from the
target. Note that tradeoffs exist between pulse rate
pulse light bandwidth and amount of stretch. Essentially the return pulses cannot overlap in the output pulse train.
Depending on the shape and nish of the target surface and thus efciency of the light return
pulses that are dispersed via the DFT system may
need some form of amplication before photodetection. Although the short illumination pulses generated via a supercontinuum light source are initially high intensity they become weaker as their
energy becomes dispersed within the ber during
the stretching process. Amplication can be used
at multiple locations within the system. Inline ber
ampliers EDFAs for instance may be used for
discrete amplication or distributed Raman amplication may be used across the dispersive ber element itself. In addition amplication options are
available with certain high speed photoreceivers.
When the shock or detonation breaks out along
the sample surface the return light is eliminated or
altered. This is analogous to the mirror destruct
technique employed with typical streak camera operations. Each projected wavelength corresponds to
a unique location on the sample surface. The geometrical wavelength mapping is determined from
the design and calibration of the projection element
of the probe. Dropouts in the return spectra correlate to the target surface locations experiencing
diminished reectivity.
In essence the image is
encoded spectrally within the collected light pulse
and can thus be transmitted to the analyzer via a single standard optical ber. So changes in the return
spectrum correspond to surface breakout locations
as a function of time and the surface can effectively
be imaged through one single ber.
The rst task completed in the development of the
system was a proof of concept study that included
the design and optical modeling of several prototype
probes capable of both generating the dispersed
light array and collecting the return signal from the
target. Elements from previous probes designed by
the author for VISAR and PDV light collection have
been fully exploited. The second task in the development of the system entailed the system hardware
assembly and optical performance testing of various
probe designs including those constructed from discrete commercial optical components for simplicity
and straightforward part acquisition.
The prototype SEI diagnostic system as designed
and built is depicted in the schematic shown in Figure 2. The simplication concept of a DFT-based
system has been selected to record the optical spectra of the probe return signal as a function of time.
This dramatically reduces the overall expense and
complexity of the alternate spectrometer and streak
An NKT Photonics SuperK EXTREME EXR-20
supercontinuum ber laser was used as the illumination component. The laser pulses at a maximum
repetition rate of 78 MHz variable via pulse picker
and generates 8 W across the output range of 475
2400 nm. Only a small portion of the output spectrum that roughly corresponds to the telecommunications C-band from 15301565 nm is used in the
current conguration. The light is ltered around
1550 nm with an 80 nm bandwidth using a Semrock
FF01-153882 BrightLine single-band bandpass lter to yield approximately 500 mW of initial system
light. The spectral properties of the illumination
system components are shown in Figure 3. With
the current system several lter options allow the
central wavelength to be adjusted within the laser
output range. These components also allow multiple bands to be used simultaneously for elding
is launched into an SMF-28
single-mode optical ber and then sent through a
5050 ber splitter to create two independent target
and reference signal paths. As described in more
detail below the reference signal can be used to increase the overall signal-to-noise ratio of the sys
tem. Depending on the expected amount of light
return from the target the split ratio can be adjusted
to ensure comparable powers through both signal
through the reference path is sent
through an optical circulator then through a retroreector section of ber then back through the circulator before entering the DFT section of the system.
The light through the target path is sent through another optical circulator then out to the target via
the probe system then collected back into the ber
through the probe system and then back through
the circulator before also entering the DFT section
For the probe a simple design constructed from
discrete commercial optical components was used
for the prototype system. The light is rst sent
through an aspheric ber collimator then directed
onto a ruled diffraction grating with a 1.6 m blaze
angle then reected towards an objective lens and
then collimated towards the at mirrored target. The
probe actually collimates the fan of spectral components while simultaneously focusing in the transverse direction. With this particular probe design
the focal length of the objective lens dictates the
overall length of the interrogation line on the target.
The mirrored target is positioned via optomechanical components to ensure that the reected light
from the target efciently re-enters the probe.
Both signal paths run through two separate channels within the DFT section of the system. For the
dispersive element in each path a 5 km spool of
SMF-28 was used. With minimal losses off the planar reective target no amplication was required.
Dispersion in the SMF-28 ber is 17.4 psnmkm
and is linear over a large region covering the optical C-band. Thus 5 km of ber yields roughly
8 ns of stretch for the 80 nm of bandwidth centered around 1550 nm. With the laser pulsing at
the maximum 78 MHz frequency the time between
successive pulses is 12.8 ns. Measurements of individual pulses within the output train at the 78 MHz
interrogation pulse rate are shown in Figure 4. Note
that the pulse orientation is negative with small dead
bands visible between successive pulses.
To acquire these pulse train measurements the
nal portion of the DFT system includes a pair
of Newport 1474-A InGaAS high speed photore
230
Fig. 2. SEI system schematic with DFT spectral analyzer.
Fig. 3. System component spectral properties.
Fig. 4. System pulse train measurements.
laserfilterlaunchsplittercirculatorcirculatorretroreflectorcollimatordiffractive opticstargetfiber spoolsphotoreceiverphotoreceiverdigitizer123123bandpassfiltersupercontinuumlaser14501500155016000.00.20.40.60.81.0wavelengthnmtransmissionmanufacturerspectraldata0123456powermWnmreferencesignaltargetsignal01020304050-3-2-10123timenssignalcountsThese
ceivers with a bandwidth of 38 GHz.
are mated to two input channels of an Agilent
DSAZ634A real-time digitizer with a bandwidth of
63 GHz and a maximum sample rate of 160 GSs.
Power measurements throughout the system are acquired with an Ophir 3A-P-V1 high sensitivity thermal power sensor.
Note that the pulse-to-pulse variations are large
with respect to spectral component amplitudes. Although the overall power output from the laser is
steady within a few percent across the full spectral
output in part due to a power lock feedback option on the laser the pulse-to-pulse variations are
signicant due to the nonlinear optical ber amplication process at the heart of the supercontinuum
light source. To correct for this the second unaltered signal path is used to acquire a reference pulse
for each pulse on target. Through a type of pulse
ratio analysis it is possible to remove the pulse-topulse variations if necessary.
If a more compact system footprint is desired a
ber Bragg grating solution can be used as the dispersive ber element for the DFT system. Though
the implementation is not detailed here components have been selected for incorporation into the
prototype system that achieve the required dispersion necessary to accommodate the laser pulse frequency and bandwidth as well as the photoreceiver
and digitizer characteristics. The chosen FBG components include a TeraXion PowerSpectrum PWSPSR pulse stretcher and a Proximion DCM-CB continuous band dispersion compensation module both
intended for ultrafast ber lasers. Note that a signicant design driver has been to maintain a small diagnostic footprint i.e. rack mountable and portable
and to build the system with commercial off-theshelf telecommunications components to ease future system duplication and assembly.
To demonstrate proper functioning of the system a series of simple static tests was performed.
These tests used a planar mirror as the target surface where selected regions of the interrogation line
on the reective target were cut off with a sharp
beam block. Figure 5 depicts the static cutoff results
for both a notch of increasing width and a sweeping
cutoff conguration. All static measurements used
a 78 MHz interrogation pulse rate with a 256 pulse
average per trace. With this averaging it is apparent that the spectral throughput of the system is the
convolution of the two component curves shown in
The upper portion of Figure 5 depicts a simulated mirror break due to a dynamic front curvature event where the reected light begins to drop
out from the center and moves progressively outward. The lower portion of Figure 5 depicts a simulated mirror break due to a dynamic sweeping wave
event where the event sweeps from left to right in
this case. In all traces the return spectra drop out
sharply as expected where the return beam is completely blocked.
The nal component needed for elding the SEI
system is knowledge of the spatial mapping through
the chosen probe design. A straightforward method
to determine this mapping is by stepping a physical
cutoff through the beam at the target and then correlating the known cutoff positions to the wavelength
dropouts in the return pulse spectra. This procedure
to characterize a given probe illumination design is
only required once. This can also be done through
accurate optical component modeling and ray tracing. Once the geometric light dispersion is characterized knowledge of where the light intersects
the target surface of any given shape is known regardless of which method is chosen. As an example
for the static cutoff tests of Figure 5 the calibration
used to correlate target space with spectral value is
To demonstrate the dynamic capabilities of the
new SEI diagnostic an explosive surface measurement was taken along a line analogous to the elding of a streak camera. An illustration of the conguration cross section of the dynamic shot is shown
in Figure 7. The explosive material was a 25 mm
wide by 150 mm long slab of Detasheet C6 PETN
variant. A mirror was afxed to one side of the
Detasheet with the silvered surface oriented towards
the explosive. In between the explosive and the mirror was also afxed a thin sheet of copper tape used
as a buffer to prevent unwanted explosive self-light
from being collected by the diagnostic probe. A single RP-2 EBW detonator was used to initiate the
Fig. 6. Cutoff calibration results for static tests.
slab from the center of the short edge and optomechanical positioners were used to align the shot with
the diagnostic probe.
The probe system used the same aspheric ber
collimator and ruled diffraction grating as the static
tests but now used an 800 mm compound relay lens
to collimate the spectral fan of light onto the target.
The shot was elded in an enclosed ring vessel
and optical access to the shot was granted through a
port and turning mirror inside the vessel. Note that
the probe system could have been mounted inside
the vessel within close proximity of the shot if optical access was not available at the facility. Again
this is one of the primary advantages of the new SEI
diagnostic. To save the probe components from destruction the convenient optical port was used.
As congured the shot standoff from the probe
relay lens was approximately 800 mm. The streak
length beam spread along the target was approximately 60 mm and the streak start offset from the
detonator output was approximately 40 mm.
addition the beam was focused to approximately
0.1 mm in the transverse direction. The physical
cutoff method was once again used to determine
the probe illumination characteristics at the target.
The results from the spatial mapping calibration are
Fig. 5. Static cutoff results from notch and sweep.
referencesignaltargetsignals024681012-6-5-4-3-2-10timenssignalcounts024681012-6-5-4-3-2-10signalcountscalibrationdatasetcalibrationfit0246802468timefrompulseleadingedgenspositionalongtargetmmFig. 7. Conguration cross section of dynamic shot.
The dynamic pulse evolution for the explosive
test is shown in Figure 9 at three separate times to
illustrate the dynamic cutoff along the interrogation
line. The interrogation pulse rate was once again
78 MHz. In Figure 9 the detonation is sweeping
from right to left in the pulse spectra as evidenced
by the sharp translating cutoff. Even with the pulseto-pulse spectral variations the cutoff positions are
clearly visible and measurable. These cutoff positions again correspond to specic physical locations
on the shot as determined via the calibration curve
Note the ideally sharp cutoff in the return pulse
spectra. With a combination of the mirror destruct
technique and copper buffer layer this result is expected. Since the dynamic cutoff is so sharp it
negates the requirement that the reference pulses be
used to increase the signal-to-noise ratio of the data.
Via simple thresholding techniques the cutoff locations in time can be acceptably determined. The
detonation shock breakout locations were then deduced via the spatial mapping curve shown in Figure 8 and the measurement results for the dynamic
test are shown in Figure 10.
At the start of the measurement line roughly
40 mm from the detonator output the detonation
In the downstream region determined to be steady by examination of the t resid
Fig. 8. Cutoff calibration results for dynamic test.
uals a linear t resulted in a detonation velocity
of 7.063  0.012 mms. This agrees quite well
by falling in between the results from two alternate
diagnostics used to measure the denotation velocity
of the same batch of Detasheet C6 in a similar shot
conguration.2 The detonation velocity determined
via FBG sensor was 7.068  0.002 mms and the
detonation velocity determined via standard shorting pins was 7.059  0.007 mms.
Though respectable the velocity error of 12 ms
with the new SEI diagnostic is larger than desired.
This is not surprising considering the simple threshold analysis used to determine the spectral cutoff
locations and the lack of noise reduction via pulseto-pulse ratio analysis with the reference signal. A
more sophisticated analysis using a signal correlation method developed by the author combined with
the pulse ratio technique should reduce the velocity
error by a factor of 25 based on prior experience
Expanded Capabilities
As the diagnostic is developed further it will be
elded on a wide variety of traditional detonation
performance tests such as rate sticks cylinder tests
onion skins and detonation failure cones. Other experimental activities include hydrodynamic testing
copper tapeDetasheet explosivemirrored surfacestreak lineviewing directiondetonator footprintglass substratefirstcalibrationdatasetsecondcalibrationdatasetcalibrationfit0246810020406080timefrompulseleadingedgenspositionalongtargetmmFig. 9. Pulse evolution of dynamic test.
gas gun testing remote testing limited access hazardous material testing and so on. The technique
will be further validated with simultaneous streak
camera elding for accuracy verication. Future
steps will include exploring the benets of varied
probe illumination patterns for specic target geometries. These may include illuminated concentric
circles grid patterns or other patterned dispersions
specically tailored to map oddly shaped target surfaces. Such alternate geometries will expand the
SEI capabilities beyond those of any existing traditional camera systems.
If the measured sample produces self-light as is
the case with detonation breakout such light may
interfere with the probe measurement in the absence
of additional diagnostic countermeasures. The most
simple countermeasure is to block the light from the
detonation with a thin optically opaque material as
was done for the dynamic test described above and
then measure the wave transmitted through that material. Alternatively considering the phase of the
light and modulating the illumination source may
be necessary to help discriminate the return signal from sample-produced light noise. Additionally
Fig. 10. Shock breakout results of dynamic test.
polarization control may be used to distinguish the
return light and noise reduction via heterodyning
is an option as well. Both options open possibilities for expanded system capabilities by exploiting
additional physics mechanisms.
It may also be possible to take advantage of existing characteristics that are inherent to the system
for simultaneous velocimetry measurements. If the
illumination light source is coherent the coherence
at each wavelength produces a mechanism for generating a Doppler-shifted signal from any given target location. In effect it may be possible to use the
technique to produce velocity data at each sample
location by using narrow bands of the collected light
with a PDV type of analysis. Another possibility
is to measure velocity continuously across the target surface via a form of split pulse interferometry.
Such a diagnostic could potentially replace many of
the expensive and cumbersome techniques in use today within the explosives testing eld and reduce
the diagnostic footprint on compact or space-valued
dynamicsignalat2.5sdynamicsignalat5.0sdynamicsignalat7.6s024681012-10-8-6-4-20timenssignalcountsdynamicshockresultssteadyshockregionsteadyshockfitfitresiduals5024680204060timespositionalongtargetmmsteadyvelocity7.0630.012mmsConclusions
The newly developed spectrally encoded imaging
SEI diagnostic is applicable to endless congurations of shock and detonation physics experiments.
In addition to the acquisition of data analogous to
traditional streak and framing camera systems the
SEI diagnostic is capable of collecting data in experiments where traditional camera systems fail. These
traditional camera limitations include the necessary
full optical access and requisite surface geometries
that are at or very nearly so depending on the optical depth-of-eld. All SEI imaging data is collected nonintrusively through a single ber. As a
result the new SEI diagnostic should prove to be a
revolutionary diagnostic development in the shock
and detonation physics eld.
The SEI diagnostic system is easy to construct
and replicate and shares many components with a
typical PDV system. As a result it is an easy process to modify an existing PDV system to add the
SEI capability. A spectrally broad light source is
needed so a modied laser or alternate illumination
source is necessary. The most expensive component in both diagnostics is the digitizer. Luckily
high speed digitizers already exist in most facilities
with modern detonation performance capabilities.
The remaining components are fairly inexpensive
ber optics. The system has been designed to be
constructed from commercial off-the-shelf equipment so that system components are readily available. Because the chosen system bandwidth for the
system as tested corresponds to the telecommunications C-band a wide variety of ber optics equipment optimized for this band is available including optical ampliers and miscellaneous ber opticSWIFT and Explosive PIV
W-6 Detonator Technology Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 USA
Abstract. The shock wave image framing technique SWIFT and explosive particle image velocimetry PIV diagnostics utilize ultra-high-speed imaging to directly visualize
explosively-driven motion in condensed transparent materials. Implementation of a simultaneous SWIFT and explosive PIV diagnostic is currently under development to quantitatively characterize the output of explosive devices by measuring both shock and material
mass motion at the same instants in time. The current state of development of the SWIFT
diagnostic as well as the ongoing implementation of explosive PIV are presented.
The shock wave image framing technique
SWIFT is a mature diagnostic in the Detonator
Technology group at Los Alamos National Laboratory for investigating the performance of explosive devices. SWIFT employs spoiled-coherence
laser backlighting coupled with schlieren optics
to observe the temporal and spatial evolution of
shock waves resulting from detonation events conned within transparent media. General system
design and implementation has been presented
previously1 and current modes of operation include sub-millimeter-scale for initiator components
millimeter-scale for detonator components and
centimeter-scale for high-expl osive HE trains.
The ability to directly visualize explosive output using ultra-high-speed frame rates allows the evolution of two-dimensional 2-D shock-front geometries to be characterized from which 2-D shock position displacement and velocity histories can be
Explosive particle image velocimetry PIV is under development to complement SWIFT by tracking
the Lagrangian motion of small tracer particles that
propagate with the mass-velocity eld moving behind detonation-induced shock waves in transparent
materials. Results from initial experiments demonstrate the need for a dynamic two-dimensional correction to be applied to experimental data in order
to correct for optical distortions that arise by viewing the ow-tracing particles through curved shock
waves2. Implementation of a simultaneous SWIFT
and explosive PIV diagnostic is currently underway
to utilize the high accuracy and reproducibility of
SWIFT data in order to develop appropriate optical
corrections for corresponding PIV data. The goal of
current research is to develop a diagnostic capable
of simultaneously measuring the temporal evolution
of shock and corresponding mass motion in two dimensions.
Recent SWIFT data are presented to demonstrate
the versatility of the technique over a range of spatial scales and current designs for the simultaneous SWIFTexplosive PIV diagnostic are discussed
with emphasis on two-dimensional corrections for
Fig. 1. Representative experimental setup for SWIFT testing.
An optical diagram of a typical SWIFT conguration is displayed in gure 1 for reference. The current SWIFT system employs a SIMD16 ultra-highspeed framing camera paired with an SI-LUX640
high-power diode laser as described previously3.
With a numerical aperture of 0.4 a 5 mm-diameter
liquid light guide passes 640  10 nm laser light
from the SI-LUX640 laser head to a collimating
objective lens. The collimated backlight passes
through the object plane to a focusing lens and an
imaging lens that work in tandem as an innitycorrected imaging system. As a result nominal system magnication M0 is determined as the ratio
of focal lengths of the imaging and focusing objectives.
Experimental data for intiator detonator and HEscale components are included in gures 2 3 and 4
respectively and a list of corresponding lens combinations is provided in table 1 for reference. The
image exposure times are kept xed at 5 ns for all
In gure 2 exploding bridge wire top and chip
slapper bottom initiators are red into ambient air
and the resulting outputs are visualized in a submillimeter eld-of-view using 20 ns inter-frame delays. For both cases the camera axis is aligned normal to the direction of electrical current across the
metal bridges and a nominally at plasma expansion is observed in the direction of the current immediately following bridge burst second and third
image frames. For the chip slapper case secondary
expansion lobes are observed that are thought to result from a combination of plasma expansion due
Fig. 2. SWIFT observation of the rst 120 ns of
top exploding bridge wire output and bottom
chip slapper output into air. A reference image has
been subtracted to enhance contrast.
to yer formation and electrical current focusing.
These types of observations in initiator ows are
currently unique to SWIFT datasets.
Figure 3 displays detonator output
polymethylmethacrylate PMMA dynamic witness
plate using 70 ns inter-frame delays. Centerline
shock breakout occurs between the rst and second
image frames and the ensuing breakout history over
the detonator surface is captured with excellent image quality. Representative methods of analyzing
detonator SWIFT data along one-dimensional 1D trajectories have been presented previously4 1
and are not repeated here. However it is shown
in the ensuing discussion that accurate 2-D shockfront geometries are needed to determine appropriate optical corrections for explosive PIV data.
general a combination of edge-detection and non
238
105 mm 500 mm 500  105
300 mm 180 mm 180  300
Table 1. Lens combinations for initiator detonator
and HE-scale SWIFT congurations.
The efforts underway to implement SWIFT and
explosive PIV together to accurately measure the
output of explosive devices rely heavily on the observation that SWIFT data is sufcient to not only
characterize 2-D explosively-driven shock motion
but the dynamic shock-front geometries as well.
Simultaneous SWIFTExplosive PIV
A schematic of the current SWIFTexplosive
PIV conguration is shown in gure 5 where two
ultra-high-speed cameras are required for recording SWIFT and explosive PIV data simultaneously.
The camera models under implementation are the
SIMD16 manufactured by Specialised Imaging and
the Ultra UHSi 1224 manufactured by Invisible
The UHSi has 7.4 m square pixels
1000880 pixels per image and 25 lpmm spatial resolution compared to the SIMD16s 6.45 m
square pixels 1280960 pixels per image and 36
lpmm spatial resolution. Both cameras record successive images on separate charge-coupled device
CCD regions with negligible optical errors that affect correlation-based techniques like PIV. In other
words the images can be successfully registered to
within sub-pixel accuracy through a combination of
in-plane translation rotation and scale. Therefore
the SIMD16 is chosen to record PIV data based on
its ner pixel size and higher spatial resolution and
the UHSi is employed to record SWIFT images.
A new top-loading explosive boombox has been
constructed to provide orthogonal optical viewports
that accommodate a PIV laser light sheet propagating orthogonally through the SWIFT backlight as
depicted in gure 5. The PIV illumination source is
a custom eight-cavity laser system manufactured by
Quantel USA and general design and performance
Fig. 3. SWIFT data depicting detonator output into
a PMMA dynamic witness plate.
Fig. 4. SWIFT data depicting HE charge output into
a PMMA dynamic witness plate.
linear curve-tting techniques has proven successful in extracting quantitative shock-front geometries
from qualitative SWIFT visualizations.
For example gure 4 depicts the detonation interaction of a 3.5 mm diameter cylindrical charge
of extrudable HE conned within PMMA using
190 ns inter-frame delays. As is the case with
the detonator data in gure 3 the high-quality images clearly delineate all expanding shock-front positions with excellent image contrast. By combining a Canny edge-detection algorithm with curvetting methods similar to historical aquarium-test
analysis5 6 HE output performance has been successfully characterized for the 3.5 mm diameter HE
charge namely detonation front velocity and radial
shock-pressure proles in PMMA3.
Fig. 5. Experimental setup for SWIFTExplosive PIV system.
specications have been described previously7 8.
Sheet-forming optics for the PIV laser light sheet
are chosen based on a 400 mm standoff distance determined by the size of the boombox and the resulting light sheet has a nominal height and thickness in
the test section of 75 mm and 1 mm respectively.
For SWIFT and explosive PIV imaging a Nikon
600 mm Nikkor super-telephoto prime lens is employed as the focusing lens and both imaging lenses
are Nikon 300 mm Nikkor super-telephoto units.
On the UHSi camera a Tamron 2x tele-converter sits
between the 300 mm Nikkor lens and the UHSi image plane to counter a 10.54 internal system magnication within the camera. A standard dichroic
beamsplitter separates and directs the 532 nm PIV
light and the 640 nm SWIFT light to each corresponding camera.
The experimental conguration depicted in gure 5 has been fully assembled and all of the capital equipment is functioning properly. Integration
of the UHSi camera into SWIFT is ongoing and
development of experimental timing and triggering
procedures are also underway. Development of the
SWIFTexplosive PIV diagnostic has been ongoing
for multiple years and the system is expected to be
functional within this calendar year.
2-D Optical Correction Development
An in-depth discussion of the development and
implementation of a 1-D refraction model based on
geometrical optics has been presented previously
for correcting PIV data obtained by viewing owtracing particles through a curved shock wave propagating within a transparent solid2.
an extension of the same refraction model is made
from 1-D to 2-D congurations in preparation for
correcting explosive PIV data.
note that optical distortions due to imaging owtracing particles through at optical ports in the
explosive boombox are accounted for through preexperiment focusing. From the viewpoint of the
recording camera the particles are imaged in focus prior to generating a curved shock wave and
that procedure calibrates the imaging system for
any static distortion present along the optical path.
As a result the refraction model need only correct
for dynamic distortions due to imaging through the
shocked volume of the transparent solid. A diagram
of the refraction model near the object plane is included in gure 6 for reference.
Fig. 6. Diagram of the 2-D refraction model near the object plane.
the imaging setup. Rays that intersect with the
hemispherical PMMA surface are refracted according to the jump in refractive index and angle of incidence that occurs at the intersection point and
the calculated refracted rays are traced back to the
object plane along straight-line trajectories. In the
model the intersection points of the refracted and
non-refracted rays with the object plane denote the
actual and apparent positions of the dots respectively.
With the imaging setup known
i.e. axial locations of the object
image and objective-lens
planes refraction model calculations are made using the 31.55 mm diameter PMMA hemisphere as
the refractive surface. The jump in refractive index
across the hemisphere corresponds to light propagating from ambient laboratory air to homogeneous
PMMA and the respective refractive indices are
n1  1.0003 and n2  1.49. As depicted in gure
6 a position error is dened as the distance between
the apparent and actual positions in the object plane.
To evaluate the refraction model results static
images of the dot-grid target recorded with and
without the PMMA hemisphere are analyzed using
a particle-tracking procedure to both identify and
locate the target dot positions. Measured position
data from the reference and PMMA-refracted images correspond to the actual and apparent dot locations respectively and a 2-D eld of position errors is calculated and plotted in gure 8. The an
Fig. 7. Image of a dot-grid target viewed through a
PMMA hemisphere immersed in ambient air.
The image displayed in gure 7 demonstrates virtual displacements that arise through optical distortion by viewing a xed-frequency dot-grid target
Edmund Optics 57-983 through a PMMA hemisphere. The target dots have a precise diameter and
center-to-center spacing of 0.500  0.002 mm and
1.000  0.001 mm respectively and the diameter
of the PMMA hemisphere is measured as 31.55 
Basically in order to correct for the optical distortion introduced into the imaging system by the
PMMA hemisphere the refraction model equations
trace virtual light rays from points in the image
plane back to the object plane using knowledge of
Fig. 8. Measured vector eld of position errors due
to optical distortion from imaging through a PMMA
hemisphere. Solid line contour denotes the circular
perimeter of the hemisphere.
nular region of space between the circular perimeter of the PMMA hemisphere and the error vectors corresponds to a region of strong-refraction
where dot locations are either not detected or not accurately measured using standard particle-tracking
procedures. With such a strong jump in refractive
index near the hemispherical perimeter large angles of light-ray incidence can combine with the
refractive-index jump to produce total internal reection within the PMMA. Consequently nearly 4
mm of radial position data are not measured from
the experimental images.
Since the PMMA refractive surface is hemispherical the position-error eld in gure 8 is reduced
to 1-D radial trajectories comparing error magnitude against radial position. A comparison between
the results of the refraction model and experimental
data is displayed in gure 9 and very good agreement is observed. Quantitatively by using the calculated position errors from the refraction model to
correct the measured apparent dot positions the
average difference between the measured reference
actual positions and the corrected data is less than
30 m within the PMMA-refracted region. As a result the 2-D refraction model is currently validated
for the case of a static refractive-surface geometry
separating homogeneous media i.e. ambient air and
Fig. 9. Position error comparison between experimental and refraction-model results.
As the implementation of
SWIFT and explosive PIV diagnostic is nearing
completion a set of benchmark tests are being designed to properly characterize the new diagnostic.
The main challenge lies in tying SWIFT and explosive PIV data together in order to properly correct for the large time-dependent optical distortions that are caused by strong explosively-driven
shock waves having high refractivity in transparent
condensed materials.
In other words signicant
corrections are expected to be applied to recorded
explosive PIV data in order to measure the correct
mass velocities but a benchmark test is required to
establish such velocities. Work is progressing along
parallel lines to either use standard detonators or
small-diameter cylindrical HE trains to provide validation datasets.
refractive-surface geometries with high accuracy however
the resulting surfaces will likely
be ellipsoidal rather than spherical which may
challenge the assumption of a constant index of
refraction at the perimeter of the refractive surface.
Additionally the static experimental data used to
validate the 2-D refraction model have not taken
into account the fact that a variable density and
refractive index eld exist behind real shock waves
resulting from detonation interaction. Such shocks
are expected to have the highest density at the
shock front location with decreasing density as one
moves towards the origin. Calculations suggest
that by only modeling refraction at the shock front
and assuming homogeneity behind it the resulting
optical corrections should represent a worst-case
scenario for calculating the position error for a
decaying density eld. Quantitative estimates on
the severity of the position errors can only be
established once benchmark testing has begun.
Efforts are underway to prove out current expectations and fully integrate SWIFT and explosive PIV for characterizing explosive device performance. Future work is focused on integrating photonic Doppler velocimetry PDV into the system as
a third orthonormal diagnostic for obtaining direct
measurements of mass-velocity history.Project Magnes  a permanent magnet array for the particle velocity gauge 
M. J. Burns M Goff  C Stennett A Roberts 
AWE PLC Reading Aldermaston RG4 7PR 
Cranfield University Shrivenham Swindon SN6 8LA 
Abstract. An array of permanent magnets has been designed to be used for the embedded 
particle velocity gauge technique used in shock initiation gas gun experiments in polymer 
bonded explosives PBXs. The array consists of six permanent magnets along with two 
field  shaping  mild  steel  components  to  maximize  the  field  strength  while  maintaining 
optimum field homogeneity. A magnetic field strength of 189.6  0.3 mT was achieved 
with a standard deviation of 0.07 across all particle velocity gauge elements. The array 
has been successfully tested with both inert and explosive targets. 
For many years the run to detonation in high 
explosives has been studied using single and twostage  gas  guns123.  Various  different 
regimes  have  been  studied  including  sustained 
pulse thin pulse and double shocks. The gas gun 
are  used  to  rapidly  accelerate  a  flier  generally  a 
well  characterised  material  to  a  desired  velocity. 
The  projectile  impacts  the  target  material  under 
study in this case a PBX. The primary diagnostic 
for  these  types  of  experiment  is  the  embedded 
magnetic  particle  velocity  PV  gauge4  as  shown 
in figure 1. The advantage that these gauges have 
over diagnostics  such  as Heterodyne Velocimetry 
HetV and embedded fibre-optics is the ability to 
track  the  evolution  of  reaction  behind  a  shock 
front.  As  such  they  are  used  to  resolve  the 
competition between release and reaction building 
up to detonation. With embedded gauges such as 
these  the  reactive  growth  far  behind  the  shock 
front  of  a  homogeneous  explosive  can  be 
distinguished from the growth at the shock front as 
seen  in  a  heterogeneous  PBX.  The  data  obtained 
from  such  experiments  are  commonly  used  to 
build  a  predictive  capability  using  reactive  burn 
models such as CREST5.  
the  magnets  above 
One  potential  concern  with 
permanent  magnets  within 
environment  is  that  the  temperatures  reached 
temperature  and  cause  demagnetisation.  A  study 
has  been  performed  by  Yan-Fen  et  al6.  A  single 
stage  gas  gun  was  used  to  shock  the  NdFeB 
magnets  to  pressures  ranging  between  4  and  7 
demagnetisation  took  place  at  a  pressure  of  4.92 
GPa.  The  concern  that  the  blast  might  cause 
demagnetisation  will  be  addressed  at  the  end  of 
this paper alongside experimental results obtained 
using the permanent magnet array.  
Particle Velocity Gauge Technique 
The  particle  velocity  gauge  technique  uses 
Faradays Law of magnetic induction which states 
that a wire of length  l  moving though a magnetic 
2                                 
between  the  coils  to  equal  the  radius R .  Typical 
Helmholtz coils used in plate impact experiments 
produce field strengths of 70 to 120 mT. While the 
field  shape  is  relatively  flat  the  variation  on  the 
field strength can be of the order 2 at a distance 
10 mm from the midpoint.  
The  use  of  permanent  magnets  has  been 
explored  in  order  to  enhance  the  field  both  in 
terms  of  strength  and  homogeneity.  Recent 
developments  have  resulted  in  a  considerable 
increase in field strength of solid state permanent 
magnets.  Neodymium-Iron-Boron  NdFeB  N50 
magnets  were  chosen  as  they  are  the  strongest 
available  with  energy  densities  as  high  as  406 
Magnet assembly modelling 
Two  dimensional  finite  element  modelling  of  the 
magnet  array  was  carried  out  using  the  FEMM 
code7 the results of which can be seen in figure 2. 
The 2D modelling was used to design the features 
required to produce the flattest and strongest field 
across the experimental region typically a cube of 
Fig.  2  Two  dimensional  finite  element  modelling 
of the magnet array.  
The  mild  steel  yoke  was  designed  to  contain 
the  field  within  the  experimental  region  thereby 
increasing the flux density B. With the majority 
of  the  field  contained  within  the  yoke  the  field 
approximately  that  of  the  Earths  magnetic  field 
thereby improving safety while handling the array. 
The  mild  steel  field  shapers  were  designed  to 
improve  the  homogeneity  of  the  field  at  the 
experimental region.  
field  of  flux  density  B   with  a  velocity  u   will 
generate a current  I  where 
Taking  into  account  the  resistance  of  the  gauge 
oscilloscope  RT  the  particle  velocity  can  be 
expressed in terms of the voltage measured Vm 
termination  resistance  of 
Clearly the control variables in the above equation 
are  B   and  l   as 
GR   is  determined  by  l .  The 
metrologised prior to each experiment. This paper 
describes a method to optimise the magnetic field 
in terms of maximising the field strength B while 
maintaining  a  highly  uniform  field.  The  stronger 
field will lead to higher amplitude signals and the 
uniformity will ensure that all the gauge elements 
can use a common field strength.   
Fig. 1 Particle velocity gauge left and schematic 
of target with embedded gauge right. 
Typically the method of generating a constant 
magnetic  field  for  gas  gun  particle  velocity 
experiments is to mount a pair of Helmholtz coils 
either  side  of  the  target1-4.  The  field  generated  is 
Where  0  is  the  permeability  of  free  space 
n is  the  number  of  turns  in  the  coils  I is  the 
current in the wire and  R  is the radius of the coil. 
The  field  is  optimized  by  setting  the  distance 
In order to carry out a complete assessment of 
the  forces  involved  during  the  assembly  of  the 
the  3D  modelling  program 
COMSOL  multiphysics  v4.2a  was  used8.  The 
Magnetostatic  solver  from  the  ACDC  module 
was used to determine the field distribution and the 
  The  completed  design  consists  of  6  NdFeB 
magnets of dimensions 100 x 100 x 25 mm where 
three magnets are stacked into a box on either side 
of  the  target  as  shown  in  figure  3.  In  order  to 
safely  control  the  magnets  tooling  was  designed 
such that the magnets were gradually introduced in 
a  sliding  motion  also  seen  in  figure  3.  When 
assembling the magnets the attractive forces must 
be  controlled  whereas 
overcome.  The  sliding  motion  was  used  as  the 
force  required  to  slide  two  magnets  together  is 
20 of that required to separate two magnets by 
pulling  directly  apart.  The  maximum 
encountered during the assembly was predicted to 
be  996  N.  These  results  were  then  used  to  guide 
the engineering of the tooling required to assemble 
and maintain the array. 
Fig. 3 3D Unigraphics model of the assembly 
of  the  field  shapers  left  and  the  completed 
Figure  4  shows  the  COMSOL  model  for  the 
completed  design.  The  peak  field  strength  in  the 
experimental  region  was  predicted  to  be  220  mT 
around the experimental region as seen in figure 5 
approximately  double  that  of  the  Helmholtz  coil 
configuration.  The  variation  in  field  strength 
across  the  length  of  the  first  gauge  element  is 
Fig. 4 3D COMSOL model of the magnet array 
Distance from center mm
Fig. 5 Predicted magnetic flux. 
The plot of the magnetic field strength shown 
in figure 5 is taken along the Y-axis with X and Z 
axes equal to zero. This is the axis to which the PV 
gauges  are  aligned.  The  regions  of  high  field 
strength 1.4 T are the mild steel yoke.   
Figure  6  shows  a  photograph  of  the  magnet 
array fully assembled and installed into the target 
chamber  of  the  Cranfield  University  single  stage 
This body of work has been carried out as part 
of  the  development  of  an  explosive  capability 
within  the  Cranfield  University  single  stage  gas 
gun  facility.  For  the  purposes  of  this  paper  the 
results from a sustained pulse gas gun experiment 
cyclotetramethylene 
tetranitramine  HMX  based  explosive  EDC37 
will  be  presented  to  provide  evidence  that  the 
magnet array is working as expected. EDC37 was 
chosen  as  it  has  previously  been  studied9-11  in 
The  experiments  consisted  of  a  10  mm  thick 
Sintox Alumina ceramic flyer with a velocity of 
735  ms  which  gave  an  input  pressure  of  4.34 
GPa. The set up of the target is shown in figure 8. 
A  6  mm  EDC37  cover  disc  was  used  as  the 
transition  from  shock  to  detonation  was  expected 
to  take  place  at  a  depth  of    11  mm    estimated 
from the Pop plot in reference 9.  A stirrup gauge 
was placed on the front surface of the cover disc to 
measure  the  impact  particle  velocity.  The  PV 
gauge  package  embedded  within  the  EDC37 
wedge pair  consisted of nine  gauge  elements  and 
three shock tracker gauges.  
 The  results  of  the  experiment  are  shown  in 
figures 9 and 10. The particle velocities measured 
with  the  gauge  elements  are  presented  as  the 
waveforms  shown  in  figure  9.    An  input  particle 
velocity  of  0.58  mms  is  apparent  over  the 
duration  of  the  sustained  pulse  1  s.  The  rise 
time  is  of  the  order 120  ns this  is  an  area  under 
investigation  and  is  likely  to  be  due  to  target 
mounting or build technique. This value compares 
to  a  typical  rise  time  of  12  ns  obtained  during 
some  shock  initiation  experiments  carried  out  on 
EDC32 at Los Alamos National Laboratories3  
The  first  four  elements  of  the  PV  gauge  are 
shown  at  depths  6.47  7.47  8.46  and  9.45  mm 
from the impact plane. The waveprofiles show the 
build in reaction in the EDC37 as expected with 
the particle velocity of the reactive hump rising to 
 1.5 mms in the deepest gauge shown.  
Fig. 6 Photograph of the magnet array mounted in 
the target chamber.  
Upon successful assembly of the magnet array 
a  automated  xyz  scan  of  the  magnetic  field  was 
carried  out.  Figure  7  presents  the  magnetic  field 
measurements  at  the  left  and  right  extremes  of 
the gauge element locations see figure 1.  
Fig  7.  Measured  magnetic  field  strength  at  the 
The field can be seen to be 189.6 mT with an 
instrumental measurement error of 0.3 mT. Across 
the complete gauge package the variation of field 
strength  has  a  standard  deviation  of  0.07.  The 
magnitude  of  the  field  strength  is  less  than 
predicted.  This  is  likely  due  to  the  differences 
between  modelling  an  ideal  geometry  and  the 
reality of the final build. 
was used to provide a good estimate of the wave 
Fig. 8 Schematic of experimental set up 
Fig. 10 Shock tracker data for the two side tracker 
gauges  ST1  and  3  the  centre  tracker  CT  and 
The  transition  coordinates  were  measured  to 
be tD 2.49 s and xD 9.96 mm and are presented in 
the Pop plot shown in figure 11.  The results from 
two previous bodies of work on EDC37910 are also 
presented  to  give  confidence  in  the  experimental 
EDC37 Rabie and Harry
Fig. 11 EDC37 Pop plot. 
The experiments show that the magnet array is 
providing  field  suitable  for  embedded  PV  gauge 
experiments  on  explosives.  The  experimental 
results are very clean with negligible noise levels. 
The magnet array has also been used in the EDC37 
ramp  loading  experiments  of  Goff12  presented  at 
this conference. The continued use of the array has 
dispelled the concern that the temperature reached 
therefore demagnetizing the array.  
the  explosive  event  would  bring 
The permanent magnet array has been proven 
to  provide  a  strong  homogenous  magnetic  field 
Fig. 9 Waveprofiles from EDC37 experiment. 
The gauge depths in mm are highlighted.  
Three  of  the  gauges  were  broken  prior  to 
firing. The effects of this can be seen in figure 9 as 
cross talk at the gauge locations evident as a drop 
in particle velocity over all four gauge traces for 
The shock tracker data obtained are presented 
in figure 10. It can clearly be seen that the tracker 
gauges are all in good agreement and line up with 
the  PV  gauge  arrival  times.  The  initial  shock 
velocity  was  measured  to  be  4.67  mms  which 
turns  over  to  a  detonation  wave  of  velocity  8.65 
mms.  These  values  are  obtained  by  fitting  a 
straight line to the data in the shock and detonation 
regions of the tracker data. This simplistic method 
compared to the current Helmholtz coils for use in 
particle  velocity  gauge  explosive  gas  gun 
experiments. The field strength has been measured 
to be 189.6 0.3 mT with a standard deviation of 
0.07 across the particle velocity gauge package.  
The  experimental  data  on  EDC37  compares  very 
well  with  previous  gas  gun  data  performed  using 
Helmholtz  coils.  The  run  to  detonation  distance 
fits on the excising Pop plot for EDC37.   As there 
are  no  current  carrying  components  to  the  array 
the  risk  of  electrical  interference  is  removed. 
Additionally  as  the  magnet  array  is  compact  it  is 
also  easy  to  transport  and  would  require  little 
modification  to  carry  out  particle  velocity  gauge 
experiments in a firing chamber.  
The  authors  would  like  to  acknowledge  the 
staff of the Dynamic Response Group at Cranfield 
University  for  their  support  in  these  experiments. 
They  would  also  like  to  acknowledge  Kasshif 
Omar  for  his  3D  field  modelling  support  during 
the  design  phase  of  this  project.  Nathan  Routley 
and  Chris  Barton  are  thanked  for  their  assistance 
throughout  the  project  in  particular  the  assembly 
of the magnet array. Martin Philpot is also thanked 
for  his  work  in  designing  the  software  used  to 
perform a three dimensional scan of the field.  Advanced Luminescent CoreShell Temperature Sensors for Use in 
Ray Gunawidjaja Helena Diez-y-Riega and Hergen Eilers 
Applied Sciences Laboratory Institute for Shock Physics 
Washington State University  
Spokane Washington 99210-1495  
Abstract. Extracting information about temperature as a function of time in an explosive 
fireball  requires  a  kinetic  analysis  of  our  luminescent  nanoparticles.  We  previously 
performed an initial evaluation of the temperature dependence of crystalline TbZrO2 
precursor  EuY2O3  coreshell  nanoparticles.  We  continued  our  investigation  of  these 
nanoparticles as potential thermosensors by exploring the optical properties as a function 
of temperature and time. The Johnson-Mehl-Avrami-Kolmogorov JMAK model is used 
We have previously reported on the synthesis 
of crystalline TbZrO2precursor EuY2O3 core 
shell  nanoparticles  for  potential  application  as 
temperature  sensors  for  fast  heating  events.1  The 
sensors would be seeded into the explosive fireball 
and  then  collected  and  analyzed  post-detonation. 
The  coreshell  nanoparticles  are  composed  of  a 
fully crystalline Tb3-doped ZrO2 core calcined at 
1000 C for 30 minutes and a shell consisting of 
unheated amorphous EuY2O3 precursors. The shell 
was prepared by growing three layers of Eu3-doped 
Y2O3 precursor p-EuY2O3 around the crystalline 
TbZrO2  core  resulting  in  TbZrO2p-EuY2O3 
coreshell nanoparticles.  
These coreshell nanoparticles were heated to 
various temperatures for nominal heating times of 
10  s  actual  time  at  maximum  temperature  was 
about 1 s via a pyroprobe 1000 CDS Analytical 
Inc. X-ray diffraction XRD spectra show that for 
high-enough  temperatures  the  p-EuY2O3  shell 
undergoes  an  amorphous  to  crystalline  phase 
Figure  1  shows  the  previously  measured 
fluorescence spectra of these samples for excitation 
at 488 nm. Since the TbZrO2 core is already fully 
expected to change due to further heating for short 
normalized  to  the  intensity  of  the  Tb3  5D47F5 
transition at 543 nm.  
Fig. 1. Fluorescence spectra of TbZrO2p-EuY2O3
coreshell  nanoparticles  heated 
temperatures for 10 s. 
The  integrated  fluorescence  intensities  of  the 
Eu3 5D07F2 transition from 606 nm to 635 nm are 
then  measured  and  plotted  as  a  function  of 
temperature  see  Figure  2.  This 
fluorescence intensity monotonically increases with 
temperature  until  about  800  C  and  then  slightly 
atmosphere  of  about  510  Torr  to  minimize 
oxidation of the graphite sheet. The heating rate is 
200  Cs.  Figure  3  shows  typical  temperature 
laser-based  heating  method 
employed in this work. 
Fig.  3.  Typical  temperature  profiles  of  the  laserbased heating method employed in this work.  
In  agreement  with  our  previous  data 
crystallization of the Y2O3 phase occurs for heating 
temperatures  of  700  C  800  C  and  900  C  as 
indicated  by  the  appearance  of  the  Eu3  5D07F2 
emission peak at 611 nm.1 Heating to 600 C is not 
sufficient to initiate crystallization even for holding 
times of 60 s. Figure 4 shows the plots of I611I543. 
Fig.  4.  Relative  fluorescence  intensity  I611I543 
versus  time  for  TbZrO2p-EuY2O3  coreshell 
nanoparticles heated to 700 C 800 C and 900 C 
The relative intensity of the Eu3 fluorescence 
and in particular the intensity of the hypersensitive 
Fig.  2.  Integrated  Eu3  5D07F2  fluorescence 
intensity as a function of temperature. 
Continuing with this work we are evaluating 
the  effect  of  time  on  the  optical  spectra  of 
About  4-7  mg  of  the  coreshell  nanoparticles  is 
encapsulated  in  a  0.0028  thick  pyrolitic  graphite 
sheet  Panasonic  Corp.  and  heated  using  a  100 
Watt CO2 laser Firestar series f100 Synrad Inc. 
to 600 C 700 C 800 C and 900 C.  The setpoint 
temperatures  are  maintained  for  holding  times 
between  2  s  and  60  s.  These  time  durations  are 
instrumental  parameters  and  heat 
conductivity  between  the  sample  holder  and  the 
actual sample. Once these measurements have been 
completed  we  will  shorten  the  heating  times 
through  modifications  to  our  experimental  setup 
and direct laser heating of the sensor materials. Our 
goal is to evaluate our sensor material for heating 
times  as  short  as  10  s.  A  high  speed  PID 
temperature  controller  HA400  RKC  Instruments 
Inc. is used to achieve and maintain an isothermal 
at the setpoint temperature. A type K thermocouple 
CHAL005  Omega  Engineering  Inc.  is  used  to 
monitor  the  heating  temperature.  The  heating  is 
performed  in  a  vacuum  chamber  with  reduced 
5D07F2 transition depends on various parameters. 
Since  the  4f  electrons  are  shielded  by  outer 
electrons interaction with the lattice is minimized. 
As such it is mostly the strength of the electric field 
and the symmetry of the ligands that determine the 
optical  properties  of  the  material.2  Sharma  et  al. 
have reported the effect of solvent host precursor 
dopant  concentration  and  crystallite  size  on  the 
fluorescence properties of Eu3 doped yttria.3 In the 
present  case  changes  in  the  intensities  can  be 
ascribed  to  the  amorphous  to  crystalline  phase 
transition and subsequently nucleation and growth 
of  the  crystalline  phase.  In  addition  an  initial 
analysis  of  the  asymmetry  R  of  the  Eu  sites  via 
comparison of the electric dipole allowed 5D07F2 
transition and the magnetic dipole allowed 5D07F1 
transition is shown in Figure 5. These differences 
indicate  that  effects  due  to  asymmetry  cannot  be 
Fig. 5. Time-dependent asymmetry ratio for various
heating temperatures. Higher ratios indicate a larger
degree of asymmetry.4 
the  700  C  heating 
Figure  4  shows  that  for  the  2  s  heating  the 
fluorescence intensity is directly proportional with 
temperature. The value is highest for the 900 C and 
Likewise the equilibrium fluorescence intensity of 
the samples heated to 800 C is higher than those 
that  were  heated  to  700  C.  However  for  the 
samples that were heated to 900 C the equilibrium 
fluorescence intensity is on in par with that of the 
samples heated to 700 C.  
It  is  believed  that  the  increasing  trend  in  the 
fluorescence intensity of the 5D07F2 transition in 
the samples heated to 700 C 800 C and 900 C 
between 2 s and 60 s correspond to nuclei formation 
of  the  EuY2O3  phase  and  that  the  fluorescence 
intensity is directly proportional to the number of 
nuclei formed. At 900 C heating temperature the 
nucleation  stage  has  quickly  reached  completion 
within the 2 s timeframe and the kinetic mechanism 
is subsequently dominated by crystallite growth. At 
this stage there is little untransformed material for 
nuclei to form in. Instead each of the formed nuclei 
fuse into each other to form larger crystals. It was 
reported  that  the  fluorescence  intensity  of  the 
5D07F2  transition  of  the  Eu3  ion  is  inversely 
proportional  with  crystallite  size.3  5  As  such  the 
lower fluorescence intensity in the samples heated 
to  900  C  might  reflect  significantly 
crystallite grain sizes compared to those heated to 
700 C and 800 C. Alternatively the reduction in 
the intensities may be due to the asymmetry effect. 
As shown in Figure 5 the sample heated to 900 C 
has a lower equilibrium R value than the samples 
heated  to  700  C  and  800  C.  A  lower  R  value 
indicates higher symmetry and lower fluorescence 
intensity  due  to  the  electric  dipole  nature  of  this 
For the samples heated to 700 C and 800 C 
where  the  amorphous  to  crystalline  nucleation 
mechanism  dominates  the  trend  in  the  change  in 
the relative intensity of the Eu3 fluorescence as a 
function of time has the characteristics of the wellknown 
Johnson-Mehl-Avrami-Kolmogorov 
JMAK  model  which  has  the  following  general 
where k and n are the Avrami constants and cid2038cid1872 
cid2038cid18721cid1857cid2879cid3038cid3047cid3289
is  the  time-dependent  fraction  of  transformation. 
The major characteristic of the JMAK model is the 
s-shaped  profile  that  indicates  a  low  rate  of 
transformation at the beginning and at the end of the 
transformation  but 
between.  The  equation  was  used  to  describe  the 
formation of spherical nuclei having a  phase in 
a matrix having an  phase. The above equation 
has also been successfully applied to describe the 
grain growth kinetics of nanocrystalline materials.1 
7 By assuming that the fluorescence intensity I of 
the  5D07F2  transition  of  the  Eu3  ion  for  the 
samples  that  were  heated  to  700  and  800  C  is 
proportional  to  the  fraction of  transformed phase 
we write eq. 1 as follows 
cid3010cid3246cid2879cid3010cid31161cid1857cid2879cid3038cid3047cid3289
 cid3010cid2879cid3010cid3116
where I is the instantaneous fluorescence intensity 
I0 is the initial intensity at the start of nucleation 
which is taken to be zero and I is the equilibrium 
limiting intensity at that temperature. 
the  onset  of  nucleation 
fluorescence intensity at 611 nm is close to zero see 
Fig. 6. Over time the fluorescence intensity evolves 
towards  a  maximum  equilibrium  limiting  value. 
In between the nucleation and the equilibrium stage 
the fluorescence intensity increases rapidly. 
Figure 6 shows that equation 2 fits well to the 
plot of relative intensity versus temperature of the 
samples  that  were  heated  to  700  C  and  800  C 
between 2 s and 60 s. The former yields k700C0.08 
n1.03 and I0.54 with R20.998 and the latter 
yields  k800C0.19  n1.05  and  I0.75  with 
R20.98. It can be seen that k800C  k700C which is 
consistent with increased nucleation rate at higher 
Fig.  6.  Plots  of  relative  fluorescence  intensity 
coreshell nanoparticles that were heated to 700 C
and  800  C  for  2  s  -  60  s  fitted  with  the  kinetic 
Work is underway to verify the suitability of 
the kinetic model and to generate additional data in 
the  vicinity  of  the  700  C  and  800  C  heating 
temperatures  to  yield  a  temperature-dependent 
Arrhenius  plot  which  is  needed  to  obtain  the 
time-temperature  dependent  kinetic 
equation. In addition the effects of asymmetry and 
grain  size  need  to  be  further  evaluated.  Finally 
additional indicators such as excitation spectra need 
to  be  evaluated  to  include  lower  temperature 
regimes in the analysis. 
Irreversible  Phase  Transitions 
This  work  was  supported  by  the  Defense 
Threat Reduction Agency Basic Research Award  Double Shock Experiments and Reactive Flow Modeling of High Pressure LX-17 
Detonation Reaction Product States 
Kevin S. Vandersall Frank Garcia Laurence E. Fried and Craig M. Tarver 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 945550 
Energetic Materials Center 
Abstract.  Experimental  data  from  measurements  of  the  reaction  product  states  of  an 
energetic material are desired to fully characterize its performance.  In a case like LX-17 
92.5 TATB and 7.5 Kel-F by weight where chemical kinetics cause the evolution of 
partially  reacted  states  this  information  becomes  even  more  vital.  Experiments  were 
performed  to  measure  reacted  states  of  LX-17  products  using  a  double  shock  method 
involving the use of two flyer materials with known properties mounted on the projectile. 
This technique sends an initial shock through the material with a pressure near to or above 
the Chapman-Jouguet CJ state followed by a second shock at a higher magnitude into 
the reaction products. By measuring the parameters of the first and second shock waves 
information on the doubly shocked product states can be obtained. The LX-17 detonation 
reaction zone profiles plus the arrival times and amplitudes of reflected shocks in LX-17 
detonation reaction products were measured using Photonic Doppler Velocimetry PDV 
probes and an aluminum foil coated LiF window. The discussion of this work includes the 
experimental  parameters  velocimetry  profiles  data  interpretation  reactive  CHEETAH 
and Ignition and Growth modeling as well as possible future experiments. 
The  insensitive  high  explosive  IHE  LX-17 
92.5 TATB 7.5 Kel-F by weight has slower 
explosives  which  create  a  3  mm  detonation 
reaction zone length 1 and shock front curvature. 
A double shock technique was chosen to provide a 
method for measuring the doubly shocked reacted 
state  and  any  kinetic  effects  at 
samplewindow  interface  using  Photonic  Doppler 
velocimetry  PDV.  The  first  shock  detonates  the 
LX-17 and the second shock then travels through 
the reacted state. If the reaction in the initial shock 
is  fast  and  complete  and  the  difference  between 
the first and second shock pressure is small then 
the measured second shock or re-shock velocity 
should  be  equal  to  the  isentropic  sound  wave 
speed  in  the  material  2.  If  the  reaction  is 
incomplete interpretation is necessary to correlate 
the second shock wave speed to the true isentropic 
wave speed.  If the difference between the first and 
second  shock  pressure  is  larger  i.e.  when  the 
change  in  the  sound  speed  with  second  shock 
pressure is not negligible then the second shock 
achieves  a  colder  state  at  a  given  pressure  than 
obtained  along  the  first  shock  Hugoniot  at  that 
same  pressure.  The  study  of  the  second  shock 
therefore  allows  the  separation  of  thermal  and 
the  equation  of  state.  
Previous  research  on  reflected  or  overdriven 
experiments  has  been  performed  by  a  number  of 
Tilt  time of arrival  
x-rays of projectile 
and laser velocity trap!
 Buffer Plate 304 SS!
Fig. 1. Schematic of the double shock experiments 
performed using a 2-part flyer impacting a buffer 
plate an LX-17 sample backed by a LiF window. 
A  Teflon  ring  not  shown  surrounds  the  sample 
and had holes for the pin were inserted through.    
Reactive Flow Models 
The Ignition and Growth reactive flow model 
12 uses two Jones-Wilkins-Lee JWL equations 
of state EOS in the temperature dependent form 
p  AeR1V  BeR2V CVT V 1  
where  p  is  pressure  V  is  relative  volume  T  is 
temperature  is the Gruneisen coefficient Cv is 
the average heat capacity and A B R1 and R2 are 
constants. The reaction rate equation is 
researchers 3-9. The work here builds on a prior 
set  of  experiments  performed  using  reflected 
shocks  with  manganin  piezoresistive  gauges  to 
measure the initial and reflected shocks 10. This 
paper  discusses  the  experimental  setup  PDV 
measured velocities comparisons to reactive flow 
modeling  and  future  work.  The  overall  goal  of 
this  work  is  to  measure  the  reacted  equation  of 
state observe any kinetic time dependent effects in 
the  second  shock  and  compare  to  reactive  flow 
models for validation.  
Experimental Procedure 
Experiments  were  performed  using  the  twostage  gun  at  Lawrence  Livermore  National 
Laboratory LLNL. Figure 1 contains a schematic 
of the experiment showing the polycarbonate sabot 
projectile  with  a  2  mm  thick  304  stainless  steel 
front  flyer  plate  backed  with  3  mm  of  tantalum. 
The  target  included  a  1.5  mm  thick  304  stainless 
steel  buffer  plate  in  contact  with  LX-17  TATB 
based high explosive that ranged from 3 to 8 mm 
thick and is backed by 10 mm of LiF as a window 
for  the  Photonic  Doppler  Velocimetry  PDV 
probes 11. A thin 12.7 m foil of aluminum was 
placed  between  the  LX-17  layer  and  the  LiF 
window as a diffuse reflector material. The LX-17 
is held in place by a 3 mm thick by 11 mm long 
retainer  ring.    2-d  simulations  of  the  experiment 
included the retainer ring.  The retainer ring LX17  and  buffer  plate  was  held  in  place  by  an 
aluminium  fixture.    Hydrodynamic  simulations 
showed that the fixture had a negligible effect on 
the experimental signal.  A set of 6 time of arrival 
shorting  pins  was  used  to  measure  the  impact 
arrival  and  subsequent  tilt.  The  impact  velocity 
was chosen to result in pressures slightly below at 
or  above  the  CJ  pressure  for  the  LX-17  sample. 
The LX-17 is driven at detonation-like conditions 
by  a  supported  shock  that  propagates  through  the 
reacting sample. The velocity was recorded using 
measurements on the x-ray film as well as a series 
of laser photodiode velocity traps. An array of four 
PDV probes were used at the back of the target for 
observing  the  shock  arrival  times  and  interface 
particle  velocity  magnitudes.    In  this  paper  only 
the center probe data is reported. Some of the 2-D 
effects  will  be  discussed  with  modelling 
where  F  is  fraction  reacted  t  is  time  in  s    is  
current density o is initial density p is pressure in 
Mbars and I G1 G2 a b c d e g x y and z are 
constants.  Vandersall  13  listed  the  detonation 
modeling parameters. Gustavsen et al. 14 showed 
the  existing  data  on  overdriven  states  of  LX-17 
and  PBX  9502  95  TATB5  KelF  5613. 
Figure  2  shows  this  experimental  data  and  the 
calculated  JWL  states.  The  JWL  EOS  is  accurate 
for  shock  velocities  exceeding  9  kms  and  shock 
pressures approaching 70 GPa.  
CHEETAH detonation models are based on a 
multiscale  approach  to  HE  detonation  modelling 
and  is  linked  into  the  ALE3D  code  16.  The 
CHEETAH detonation model includes more EOS 
features than a traditional model.  A comparison of 
the details is shown in Table 1. Figure 3 shows an 
output  of  the  species  set  mass  fraction  as  a 
function  of  time.  The  current  Cheetah  detonation 
models are typically applied to steady detonation.  
The version used to model the current experiments 
could potentially determine although this is desired 
to implement in the near future. 
Results and Discussion 
The  experimental  details  for  the  series  of 
double  shock  experiments  are  shown  in  Table  2 
including  the  experiment  number  date  fired 
impact velocity and component dimensions. In the 
experiments  the  thickness  of  the  LX-17  samples 
information  about  the  evolution  of  the  wave  as  a 
function  of  distance  travelled.  The  high  flyer 
velocities are sufficient to cause rapid initiation of 
detonation in LX-17 by the shock waves from the 
steel  impact.    The  impact  of  the  tantalum  part  of 
the flyer then creates a second shock in the LX-17 
products.  The  impact  of  the  doubly  shocked 
reaction  products  on 
aluminum  coated  LiF  crystal  causes  a  reflected 
shock  to  propagate  back  into  the  LX-17  reaction 
products.  Depending on the thickness of the LX17 layer this shock reflection can occur before the 
arrival  of  the  shock  produced  by  the  tantalum 
layer  resulting  in  a  more  complex  interface 
particle  velocity  flow.  Although  two  shocks  are 
driven  into  the  LX-17  and  two  shocks  are 
measured  in  most  experiments  it  is  important  to 
there  are  multiple  shock  wave 
interactions  occurring  in  the  experiment.    The 
hydrodynamic reactive flow models must account 
for all these interactions plus the reaction rates and 
EOS states of LX-17 products shocked to various 
Figures 4 and 5 display the center PDV probe 
signals  for  the  first  four  experiments  outlined  in 
Table  2.  Although  only  the  center  probes  are 
shown  the  center  probes  were  compared  to three 
Table  1.  Comparison  of  Ignition  and  Growth  and 
ALE3DCHEETAH detonation model details.  
Detail  Traditional reactive 
Green et al. LX-17 expts
 Gustavsen et al. 9502 expts
 Tang et al 9502 expts
Particle Velocity kms
Figure 2. Shock velocity - particle velocity data for 
LX-17 and PBX 9502 overdriven detonations. 
Fig. 3. Plot of species mass fractions as a function 
of time for the CHEETAH detonation model.  
redundant  probes  on  an  outer  perimeter.  These 
probes  showed  some  variation  possibility  due  to 
projectile  tilt  and  in  the  thickest  sample  the 
rarefaction  release  waves  from  the  edges.  The 
experimental  results  are  compared  to  2D  Ignition 
and Growth and Cheetah detonation modelling in 
order to gain an understanding of kinetic effects.  
As  seen  in  Figs.  4  and  5  the  shape  of  the 
second shock wave shows a more rounded front 
for  all  experiments  that  possibly  indicates  some 
product  reaction  kinetic  effects  in  the  doubly 
shocked  high  pressure  high  temperature  LX-17 
products.    Such  a  re-equilibration  process  in 
detonation reaction products has never previously 
been measured. If this phenomenon does occur it 
is  unrealistic  to  expect  the  current  reactive  flow 
models  which  do  not  contain  a  chemical  kinetic 
re-equilibration  model 
agreement with the experimental data. 
Fig. 4 the initial shocks and LX-17 reaction zone 
profiles  are  seen 
in  both  experiment  and 
calculations. Simulations are shown aligned to the 
experimental  first  arrival  time.    The  calculated 
second  shock  arrival  timings  are  close  to  those 
measured experimentally.  The rounding of second 
shock is observed in the experimental data but not 
in the model results. Both the Ignition and Growth 
and  Cheetah  second  shock 
interface  particle 
measured.    The  Cheetah  results  are  closer  to  the 
experimental  records.    For  the  slightly  higher 
velocity  experiments  in  Fig.  5  experiment  4111 
experiment  with  rounding  of  second  shock  and 
experiment  4112  shows  a  similar  behavior 
although due to the thin 3 mm thick LX-17 layer 
a third shock wave is observed at a later time. The 
the  modeling  results  again 
provides  an  overall  general  agreement  but  not  an 
exact match of profile. Both models again predict 
higher  velocities  than  measured  and  the  Cheetah 
results are closer to the measurements.  
initial  shock  and  decay 
The  basic  features  in  the  experiments  are 
reproduced in the comparisons of the model to the 
data.  In  experiments  4109  and  4110  outlined  in 
Table 2. Experimental details for the double shock experiments including component dimensions. 
3.511 kms  Ta 3.022 mm 
3.518 kms  Ta 3.018 mm 
3.916 kms  Ta 3.016 mm 
3.737 kms  Ta 3.020 mm 
2.49 kms  Ta 3.019 mm 
4.90 kms  Ta 3.019 mm 
3.35 kms  Ta 3.020 mm 
4.67 kms  Ta 3.020 mm 
LX-17 Double Shock Experiment 4109
 yer velocity  3511 ms
 PDV experimental record
 CHEETAH calculation
 Ignition  Growth calculation
LX-17 Double Shock Experiment 4110
 PDV experimental record
 Ignition and Growth calculation
 CHEETAH calculation
Figure  4.  Comparison  of  experimental  and 
modelling results for experiment top 4109 with a 
3.51 kms impact velocity and 8 mm thick LX-17 
sample and experiment bottom 4110 with a 3.52 
kms  impact  velocity  and  6  mm  thick  LX-17 
SSTa yer vel.  3.737 kms
 PDV experimental record
 Ignition  Growth model
Figure  5.  Comparison  of  experimental  and 
modelling results for experiment top 4111 with a 
3.92 kms impact velocity and 6 mm thick LX-17 
sample and experiment bottom 4112 with a 3.73 
kms  impact  velocity  and  3  mm  thick  LX-17 
4900 ms Impact Velocity
 Ignition and Growth
3350 ms Impact Velocity
 Ignition and Growth
Figure  7.  Comparison  of  experimental  and 
modelling results for experiment 4179 with a 4.90 
kms  impact  velocity  and  5  mm  thick  LX-17 
Figure  8.  Comparison  of  experimental  and 
modeling results for experiment 4180 with a 3.35 
kms  impact  velocity  and  6  mm  thick  LX-17 
4670 ms Impact Velocity
 Ignition and Growth
Figure  9.  Comparison  of  experimental  and 
modeling results for experiment 4181 with a 4.67 
kms  impact  velocity  and  6  mm  thick  LX-17 
The  interface  particle  velocities  measured  in 
four  more  recent  experiments  with  lower  and 
higher flyer velocities listed in Table 2 are shown 
in  Figs.  6    9.  The  Ignition  and  Growth  and 
Cheetah  comparisons  are  also  shown.  The  same 
trends are apparent as those seen in Figs. 4 and 5.  
The initial shock fronts and reaction zone profiles 
plus  the  arrival  times  of  the  second  shocks  from 
both the Cheetah and Ignition and Growth models 
agree  well  with  experiment.  Both  reactive  flow 
models  predict  higher  interface  particle  velocities 
than  the  experimental  measurements.  Again  the 
Cheetah predictions are closer to experiment than 
the Ignition and Growth predictions.  
The  better  agreement  observed  in  the  second 
and third shock regimes produced by the Cheetah 
code  compared  to  those  from  the  Ignition  and 
the  more  detailed 
description  of  the  reaction  product  EOS  at  these 
extreme  pressures  and  temperatures.  The  JWL 
product EOS is a six-parameter equation fit to the 
single  shock  product  Hugoniot  data  as  shown  in 
Fig.  2.  When  these  products  are  re-shocked  once 
or twice the resulting compression states may not 
be accurate. They could over or under predict the 
degree of compression in the second shock wave. 
Since  Cheetah  is  based  on  a  complex  potential 
interaction  scheme  between  the  various  product 
species it potentially has the ability to yield better 
descriptions of the multiply shocked products.    
2490 ms Impact Velocity
 Ignition and Growth
Figure  6.  Comparison  of  experimental  and 
modelling results for experiment 4178 with a 2.49 
kms  impact  velocity  and  5  mm  thick  LX-17 
in  Figs.  10  and  11.  The 
interface  velocities  were 
converted  to  pressures  as  a  function  of  time  by 
impedance  matching  to  the  LiF  window  and  are 
matching procedures rely on the continuity of the 
pressure and particle velocity across the LiF LX17  interface. 
  The  thin  reflector  material  is 
assumed  to  make  a  negligible  contribution  to  the 
measured  particle  velocity. 
relation  from  Marsh  15  was  used  for  the  LiF 
equation  of  state. 
  The  impedance  matching 
analysis ignored the difference in pressure between 
first  and  second  shock  states 
Calculations  with  Cheetah  using  a 
equation  of  state  for  LiF  demonstrated  that  there 
was  less  than  0.1  GPa  difference  in  pressure 
between a first and second shock state in LiF for a 
typical  first  and  second  shock  pressure  of 40  and 
50 GPa respectively. We see that first shock states 
are  between  30  and  80  GPa  while  second  shock 
states are between 35 and 90 GPa.  The difference 
between  the  first  and  second  shock  state  is 
typically  10-20  GPa.    The  second  shocks  are 
sufficiently strong that second shock wave speeds 
are  expected  to  significantly  exceed  the  sound 
speed speed in the first shocked state. 
The  impedance  matching  procedure  is  applicable 
to  one-dimensional  flow.    As  rarefaction  waves 
travel  toward  the  center  of  the  charge  the  flow 
becomes two-dimensional.  We have estimated the 
time  of  one-dimensional  flow  by  performing 
hydrodynamic  simulations  in  both  planar  1-d  and 
cylindrical  2-d  symmetries.    In  Figure  12  we 
compare  1-d  and  2-d  calculations  for  experiment 
4109.    In  general  2-d  simulations  more  closely 
match  experiment  than  the  1-d  simulations.  We 
find  that  1-d  flow  is  maintained  until  after  the 
simulations  confirmed  that  this  was  true  for  all 
experiments reported here. 
Figure 10. Plot of experimental pressures vs. time 
experiments 4109 to 4112.  
impedance  matching 
Figure 11. Plot of experimental pressures vs. time 
experiments 4178 to 4181.  
impedance  matching 
Figure  12    Comparison  of  one-dimensional  and 
two-dimensional  simulations  of  the  double  shock 
A  double  impactor  method  was  used  to 
measure  the  reacted  equation  of  state  in  LX-17. 
These  experiments  utilized  a  PDV  technique  to 
measure  the  double  shock  at  the  interface  with  a 
LiF  window.  Comparisons  of  the  experimental 
Ignition  and  Growth  and  Cheetah 
detonation models revealed that the main features 
matched  reasonably  well  but  some  differences 
still  need  to  be  resolved.  The  experimentally 
measured roundings of the second shock waves 
are very interesting.  These structures are possibly 
a result of re-equilibration reaction kinetics in the 
high  pressure  high  temperature  LX-17  reaction 
products.    The  Cheetah  chemical  equilibration 
code has the capability to determine what chemical 
species andor concentrations may be changing in 
the  second  shock  regime.    One  possibility  is  the 
state  of  the  solid  carbon  products.    At  C-J 
detonation pressure and temperature TATB forms 
mainly  graphite  nanoparticles  but  at  higher 
pressures  and  temperatures  diamond  may  be  the 
preferred form of carbon.  Carbon nitrides are also 
possibilities.  Re-equilibration  of 
products  amongst  themselves  could  also  occur.  
Dissociation  andor  ionization  of  certain  products 
are also possible.  An analytical EOS form like the 
JWL equation can be refitted to match the second 
and  third  shock  states  but  cannot  explain  the 
underlying cause of these experimental results. 
Future  Cheetah  reactive  flow  modeling  is 
differences  with  the  experimental  results.  Future 
experiments are in progress using a similar target 
configuration with the two-stage gun over a wider 
range of overdriven pressures and different initial 
Special thanks go to Ricky Chau and the gas 
gun  crew  of  Sam  Weaver  Cory  McLean  Steve 
Caldwell  and  Bob  Nafzinger  for  their  hard  work 
firing the experiments. This work performed under 
the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by 
Lawrence  Livermore  National  Laboratory  under 
Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344. Fiber Bragg Grating Sensors and Their Sensitivity to Changes in Detonation 
Velocity across Interfaces 
George Rodriguez Steve M. Gilbertson Samuel W. Vincent and Scott I. Jackson
Materials Physics and Applications Division 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 
Weapons Experiments Division 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 
Abstract. Measuring detonation front position and velocity has been demonstrated using 
an  all-optical  chirped  fiber  Bragg  grating  CFBG  approach  with  the  ability  to  detect 
velocity changes across material interfacial boundaries.  An experiment conducted with a 
cylindrical rate stick consisting of multiple high explosive HE segments of PBX 9501 
Composition  B  TNT  PBX  9407  PBX  9502  and  finally  inert  PMMA.  Spatial  and 
temporal resolution was determined by comparing the measured detonation front position 
and  velocity  changes  at  interfaces  by  using  long  gratings  100  mm  with  low  spatial 
resolution  and  short  10  mm  gratings  with  high  spatial  resolution.      A  streak  camera 
diagnostic  independently  validated  all  grating  measurements.  The  gratings  showed  that 
the  measurement  resolution  of  unsteady  detonation  phase  velocities  increased  with  the 
high  spatial  resolution  gratings.    We  attained  a  spatial  resolution  of  46  Pm  using  the 
higher  resolution  10  mm  gratings.  The  spatial  resolution  is  dependent  on  the  vertical 
dynamic range of the 8-bit oscilloscope recording system and it is expected to be below 
10 Pm should 12-bit recorders be used.  Additionally a decaying shock driven into the 
PMMA segment provided a measure of the minimum internal fiber pressure required for 
prompt grating destruction and accurate shock wave velocity measurement.  This critical 
pressure was calculated to be approximately 2.1 GPa. 
Fiber  Bragg  grating  FBG  sensors  are 
proving to be a valuable diagnostic for detonation 
and  shock  diagnostics.1234  They  provide  very 
good  detonation  and  shock  tracking  performance 
when compared to other established methods such 
as electrical pins optical streak camera recording 
or velocimetry.  They are relatively simple to field 
offer a continuous measurement record and do not 
need  line-of-sight  optics  such  as  in  imaging  or 
their  versatility  makes 
laser velocimetry for operation. These sensors can 
be  attached  to  inert  and  high  explosive  HE 
materials  as  surface  or  embedded  probes  and 
because  they  operate  in  detonation  andor  shock 
attractive  as  dynamic  sensors  in  detonation  and 
shock  events  of  materials  that  are  otherwise 
problematic to diagnose using surface-only probes. 
At Los Alamos we have applied the technology to 
develop  a  diagnostic  baseline  for  both  HE 
detonation and shock velocity measurements.  We 
have  previously  reported  on  the  accuracy  of  the 
approach  for  detonation  front  measurements  by 
comparing with electrical pin data from rate stick 
measurements.235  However  detailed  questions 
about  the  resolution  of  the  approach  remained. 
Therefore  in  this  paper  we  establish  confidence 
measurements  that  attempted  to  determine  spatiotemporal  resolution.  The  detonation  and  shock 
front  measurements  described  here were  aimed  at 
quantifying  resolution  by  comparison  of  several 
chirped  FBG  CFBG  sensors  with  a  high- 
resolution  complementary  diagnostic  an  imaging 
streak camera.  We chose an experimental test case 
where  the  detonation  velocity  was  expected  to 
vary  rapidly  such  as 
in  a  situation  across 
interfacial boundaries where multiple segments of 
a  rate  stick  was  comprised  of  various  HE 
formulations.  In  addition  to  measurements  along 
the length and across interfaces of the HE portions 
we also tested detonation-to-shock tracking across 
an HEinert material interface by placing a piece of 
acrylic plastic  at the end of the HE run. We used 
multiple  CFBG  sensors  on  this  test  with  varying 
lengths and spatial wavelength chirp to determine 
the resolution of each type. Below we describe the 
methods of this test that yielded our results. 
system  was  described 
The  technique  of  CFBG  detonation  front 
velocity  measurements 
originally  developed  for  the  telecommunications 
industry. A diagram of the principle of operation is 
shown  in  Figure  1a.  The  detonation  velocity 
elsewhere2  and  we  give  a  brief description  here.  
Our  light  source  was  an  amplified  spontaneous 
emission  ASE  source  covering  the  C-band from 
1525  nm  to  1565  nm.    Light  launched  from  the 
ASE source into a single-mode fiber and directed 
to a 3-port circulator.  The circulator directs light 
to  a  chirped  fiber  Bragg  grating  CFBG  sensor.  
The  CFBG  was  a  linearly  chirped  grating  written 
along some length of the fiber and with maximum 
reflectivity  in  the  C-band.  Reflected  light  return 
circulator  to  the  detector.    A  variable  attenuator 
controlled the optical power to the gratings is so as 
not  to  saturate  the  detectors.    All  of  the  CFBG 
the  grating  was  directed 
channels  came  integrated  into  two  four-channel 
chassis boxes from Timbercon Inc.  Each channel 
inside the chassis box contained a 10 power tap 
for monitoring the spectrum of the returning light 
of  the  CFBG  and  a  DC-coupled  50-Ohm  output 
250-MHz  InGaAs  photodetector.    The  detectors 
yield a total temporal resolution limit of 4 ns.  The 
signal from the 10 tap was sent to a fiber-based 
512-element  linear  diode  array  spectrometer  to 
characterize  the  spectrum  of  each  grating  before 
the  detonation.    The  CFBGs  send  the  light  return 
power typically 1 mW or 0.0 dBm to the chassis 
box  which  then  outputs  an  electrical  signal  to  a 
transient  digitizer 
oscilloscope. The recording bandwidth was 1 GHz 
and the sampling rate was 5 GSamps.   With this 
setup  up  to  8  CFBG  sensors  fieldable  onto  a 
single experiment with the capability of upgrading 
the number of channels only limited by the amount 
of  light  present  in  the  ASE  source.  In  theory  the 
number of channels may be as large as possible by 
simply using multiple ASE sources. 
Fig. 1. a Chirped fiber Bragg CFBG detonation 
detection  system.  b The  response  functions  for 
detonation  measurements.    The  left  panel  shows 
the total reflected spectrum and ASE source.  The 
center  panel  shows 
intensity  Rt  as  a  function  of  wavelength  and 
grating length. The right panel shows the length as 
a function of time of the grating as it is destroyed 
by a detonation front. 
The  CFBG  was  placed  in  direct  contact  with 
the  HE  and  as  the  detonation  wave  travels  along 
the  length  of  the  CFBG. As  the  HE  detonation 
wave  travels  along  the  length  of  the  sensor  the 
fibers index of refraction is first modified by the 
intense shock driven into the fiber by the adjacent 
high-pressure  detonation  products  as  the  wave 
propagates  axially  along  the  gratings  length.  In 
rapid  succession  the  grating  is  consumed  by  the 
high  temperatures  and  pressures  associated  with 
this event. Shock-processed portions of the grating 
no  longer  transmitreflect  light  due  to  substantial 
modification  to  the  local  index  of  refraction  and 
damage of the grating structure. Once a segment of 
the  grating  is  destroyed  that  portion  of  the 
reflected  spectrum  is  no  longer  present  thereby 
causing  the  total  light  return  signal  to  decrease.  
Figure  1b  shows  how 
the  experimentally 
obtained oscilloscope trace of voltage versus time 
is transformed into a plot of length versus position. 
The center frequency of the grating reflection was 
1550  nm  and  the  reflection  bandwidth  was  less 
than  the  bandwidth  of  the  ASE  source.  We 
selected of only the flattest portion of the spectrum 
for the experiments.  While this was not necessary 
it simplified the data analysis procedure. The timedependent reflected intensity Rt is proportional 
to  the  integral  of  the  returning  light  spectrum  of 
the grating.  In general the integrated light return 
voltage signal is given2 by  
where  a  is  a  normalization  constant  SGO  is  the 
reflected spectrum from the grating ASEO is the 
ASE light source spectrum and O1 and O2 are the 
lower  and  upper  wavelength  limits  respectively. 
When the gratings are encoded with the chirp the 
length to wavelength relationship is linear meaning 
wavelength  O  provided  the  ASE  light  source 
spectrum  can  be  assumed  to  be  flat.  Once  Rt
versus  L  is  known  a  look-up-table  is  created  to 
map  the  experimentally  obtained  Vt  signal  from 
the  oscilloscope  traces  to  a  grating  length  L
versus  time.  The  time  derivative  of  this  curve 
yields  the  detonation  velocity  along  the  length  of 
For  this  experiment  a  multi-HE  rate  stick 
comprised of five types of HE and an inert PMMA 
segment  was  used  to  test  the  effectiveness  at 
measuring  detonation  velocities  from  three  types 
of  CFBGs  with  different  linear  chirp  rates.  The 
the  spatial  resolution 
capabilities  of  the  gratings.    In  one  case  short 
gratings  with  a  quick  variation  of  reflected 
wavelength  versus  length  placed  at  the  interfaces 
between  each  HE  segment.  This  was  compared 
with  long  gratings  having  a  slower  variation  of 
reflected  wavelength  versus  length  but  able  to 
cover  several  interfaces  with  a  single  grating.  
Figure 2a shows a schematic for how the gratings 
mounted on  the  rate  stick.   The HE  charges  were 
first  marked  with  right  angle  square  ruler  to 
indicate  the  linear  placement  position  of  the 
gratings.    The  effect  of  misaligned  non-normal 
position  of  the  gratings  with  respect  to  the  burn 
front  was  not  considered  but  it  could  potentially 
lead  to  phase  velocity  error  depending  on  the 
angular misalignment during placement.  Detailed 
studies of such effects should be a subject of future 
investigation.  The  rate  stick  itself  consisted  of  5 
types  of  HE  PBX  9501  Composition  B  TNT 
PBX  9407  and  PBX  9502  followed  by  an  inert 
PMMA  segment.    Each  segment  was  25.4  mm 
long and 12.7 mm in diameter.  An RP-1 detonator 
initiated  the  rate  stick.    The  test  diagnostics 
consisted  of  five  10-mm-long  CFBGs  a  70-mmlong  CFBG  and  a  100-mm-long  CFBG.  We 
mounted  the  longer  two  gratings  so  that  they 
overlapped  each  other 
acquisition.  All of the CFBGs were glued in place 
M-bond  200  epoxy  as  shown  in  Figure  2.  The 
gratings were attached at slightly different azimuth 
angles  to  avoid  fiber  cable  interference.  The 
spectra  for  the  gratings  are  shown  in  figure  2b 
for the 10-mm CFBGs and c for the 70-mm and 
100-mm  CFBGs.  In  all  cases  the  spectra  are 
relatively  flat.  The  chirp  of  each  CFBG  was 
measured  before  and  after  attachment  to  the  HE 
reflectometer.  The  measured  chirp  values  for  the 
10-mm  gratings  were  all  3.5  nmmm  0.49 
nmmm for the 70-mm gratings and 0.35 nmmm 
for the 100 mm grating. 
Fig.  2.    a  Illustration  of  the  multi-HE  rate  stick  experiment.    Each  segment  was  equal  in  length  and 
gratings  of  various  sizes  given  by  the  blue  green  and  red  line  segments  covered  the  interfaces.  The 
reflected  spectrum  of  each  grating  showing  the  overall  flat-topped  nature  are  shown  for  the  b  10  mm 
gratings c the 70 mm black line and d the 100 mm red line. 
Fig. 3. The measured velocity across the interfaces of each HE segment for the 10 mm gratings.  The type 
of HE and the velocity are indicated.  f The measured velocity across the interfaces for the 70 mm black  
and 100 mm red gratings.  The two curves are very similar and lie on top of each other.  The horizontal 
lines indicate the locations of the HE interfaces in all graph panels a-f. 
Figure 3 shows the experimental data. The 10 
mm  gratings  are  shown  in  3a-e  while  the  70mm and 100-mm gratings are both shown in 3f.
In  all  panels  of  Figure  3  the  horizontal  dashed 
lines  represent  the  interfaces  of  the  different  HE 
segments. A discontinuity occurs at the interfaces 
in  a-e  due  to  velocity  of  the  detonation  front 
changing  as  it  enters  a  new  HE  segment.  These 
changes  are  not  as  pronounced  in  the  longer 
gratings  Figure  3f  however.  We  can  attribute 
this to the increased spatial resolution afforded by 
the  shorter  gratings.  Additionally  in  e  the  inert 
PMMA  segment  shows  a  shock  wave  launched 
into the material as opposed to a detonation wave 
as expected. The nature of the signal is indicative 
of  an  attenuating  pressure  shock  that  partially 
disrupts the sensor as opposed to destroying it after 
a few mm of propagation into the sample. A label 
in  each  plot  indicates  the  average  detonation 
velocity  across  the  sensor  for  each  HE  segment.  
For  the  10-mm  CFBGs  the  average  detonation 
velocity was determined by performing a linear fit 
to 4.75 mm of the position data for each material 
segment  approximately  5  mm  of  each  10  mm 
CFBG grating was located on separate HE types.  
The  velocities  are  within  good  agreement  of 
accepted  values6  with  differences  stemming  from 
the  small  diameters  of  the  rate  stick  not  allowing 
for maximized detonation velocity. 
It is important to note that the dynamic range 
of  the  oscilloscopes  vertical  scale  limited  the 
the  gratings.  The 
maximum  linear  photodetector  output  is  2  Volts 
DC.  The  oscilloscopes  used  in  this  experiment 
were  8-bit.    Therefore  the  smallest  resolvable 
incremental  voltage  difference  is  7.8  mV  i.e. 2 
V28.  An incremental voltage change of 7.8 mV 
yields  an  ultimate  spatial  resolution  from  the 
oscilloscope  sosc  of  39  Pm  for  the  10  mm 
gratings and 390 Pm for the 100 mm grating. The 
real experimental spatial resolution was worse than 
this  due  to  the  noise  of  the  scope  channels 
inherent in the system and stemming from the 250 
MHz photodetectors. The scope itself had a sample 
rate  of  2.5  GSamps  allowing  the  data  to  be 
oversampled.  Averaging the data by 10 points to 
take  advantage  of  the  oversampling  reduced  the 
noise  floor  to  5  mV.  Resolution  from  such  a 
noise  level  which  we  call  snoise  and  with  the 
ultimate  resolution  from  the  scope  we  find  an 
noise12  of  46 Pm  for  the 10  mm 
grating and nearly 460 Pm for the 100 mm grating. 
Table 1 shows the results of the spatial resolution 
and temporal resolution for an 8 mmPs detonation 
wave  measured  from  each  of  the  grating  lengths. 
By using detectors with less noise and scopes with 
higher  dynamic  range  a  significant  improvement 
to  spatial  resolution  is  expected.  For  example  a 
10-bit  scope  would  be  able  to  resolve  a  voltage 
change  of  1.9  mV  while  the  12-bit  scope  can 
resolve  0.5  mV.  These  correspond  to  ultimate 
resolutions  of  98  Pm  9.8  Pm  and  24  Pm  2.4 
Pm  respectively  for  the  100  mm  10  mm.  This 
represents  a  significant  improvement  over  the 
resolution  of  the  8-bit  scopes  and  is  being 
implemented in future experiments. 
Table 1. List of the fiber lengths and chirps used in 
this experiment along with measured temporal and 
spatial resolutions with 8-bit recording.  10-bit and 
12-bit based oscilloscopes vastly improve these 
In  addition  to  the  CFBGs  an  imaging  streak 
Cordin  Model  132  simultaneously 
recorded the position of the detonation front versus 
time.    An  external  light  source  front  illuminated 
the charge.  The charge had a polished flat facet to 
allow  for  specular  light  reflection  off  the  facet 
surface  using  an  argon  flash  light  source.7  Light 
collected off the flat surface reflection was imaged 
on  to  the  streak  camera.    The  explosively-driven 
argon  flash  contained  light  intensity  of  sufficient 
produced by explosive product self-light from the 
charge. Figure 4a shows the streak camera image 
with  the  static  image  at  the  top  and  the  dynamic 
data on the bottom.  Figure 4b shows the results 
of extracting the position vs. time data.  The streak 
superimposed  with  the  10  mm  gratings  appearing 
approximately  every  25  mm  short  solid  colored 
segments.  The  agreement  between  the  streak 
camera  data  and  gratings  is  excellent  with  1 
error  in  the  measured  velocities.  This  error  could 
come  from  discrepancies  in  the  measured  lengths 
of each grating. Also shown in Figure 4b are the 
data  sets  for  the  longer  CFBGs.    These  are  the 
green dotted lines 100 mm and purple dotted line 
70  mm.    The  sets  are  difficult  to  distinguish 
because they lie on top of each other so well. The 
data agrees well with both the 10 mm grating data 
and  the  streak  camera  data.    Since  the  spatial 
resolution  of  the  two  longer  gratings  was  worse 
than the smaller gratings we do not expect to see 
as  small  of  changes  in  the  velocity  for  the  long 
gratings.  However since they are long enough to 
cover several segments of the multi-HE rate stick 
we can compare the overall subtle changes seen in 
the  streak  camera  data  to  the  grating  data.    The 
results  here  are  also  in  agreement  with  the 
accepted values.6  There is a larger error in the 100 
mm grating as compared to the streak camera data 
at the very beginning which we can attribute to the 
grating  being  in  close  proximity  to  the  detonator.  
This effect quickly disappears and the grating data 
and streak camera show agreement after the first 78 mm. The effect was not observed in the 70 mm 
Finally  in  the  PMMA  sample  segment  the 
CFBG  data  diverges  heavily  from  the  streak 
camera  data.  The  spatial  location  where  the 
divergence  begins  is  5  mm  away  from  the 
PBX9502  interface  inside  the  sample  at  t17.5Ps
Fig.  4b.  This  behavior  is  indicative  of  the 
minimum  pressure  where  the  CFBG  is  no  longer 
promptly destroyed. The PMMA shock velocity at 
this  point  as  given  by  the  streak  camera  data  is 
4.22  mmPs.    Using  the  Hugoniot  relations 
Usc0sup  and  PU0Usup  and  solving  for  P  after 
eliminating up yields the pressure in the HE.  In the 
above equations Us is the shock velocity from the 
streak camera data up is the particle velocity U0 is 
the uncompressed density c0 is the speed of sound 
in  the  bulk  material  and  s  is  a  parameter 
describing  the  slope  of  the  shock  Hugoniot.    For 
PMMA  s1.816  c02.260  mmPs  and  U01181 
kgm3.    Using  the  shock  Hugoniot8  we  estimate 
the pressure in the PMMA as 5.38 GPa at the point 
that the two datasets diverge. The pressure and  
Figure 4a Image of the static top and dynamic 
camera  measurement.  The 
locations  of  the  HE  interfaces  are  shown  as  the 
vertical  lines.  b  Comparison  of  the  position 
versus  time  data  of  the  10  mm  gratings  small 
solid  segments  70  mm  grating  purple  dotted 
line and 100 mm grating green dotted line to the 
streak  camera  velocity  measurement  taken  from 
a black solid line. 
particle  velocity  within  the  fiber  itself  will  be 
different  from  the  PMMA  however  due  to  the 
impedance  mismatch  of  the  two  materials.    We 
assume  the  high-pressure  PMMA  drives  a  shock 
laterally  into  the  adjacent  fiber  fused  silica  fiber 
and we calculate the pressure induced in the fiber 
at  the  critical  velocity.  The  post-shock  state 
resulting  from  the  interaction  of  the  two  adjacent 
materials  was  solved  by  assuming  impedance 
to be installed on the same HE shot to allow higher 
resolution  and  possibly  even  three  dimensional 
tracking  of  detonation  waves  across  the  entire 
volume  of  the  HE.  We  also  believe  that  these 
results  are  useful  for  those  considering  use  of 
CFBGs for card gap tests with CFBGs showing the 
ability to track across multiple interfaces. 
This work was supported by the DOENNSA 
Leda  project  at  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory 
under  the  auspices  of  the  U.S.  Department  of 
Energy  for  Los  Alamos  National  Security  LLC 
Contract No. DE-AC52-06NA25396. Towards optical control of energetic materials 
Margo T. Greenfield Shawn D McGrane Katie Brown David S. Moore and R. Jason Scharff 
Weapons Experimentation Division Shock and Detonation Physics Group- WX-9 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos New Mexico USA 
Abstract.  Achieving  direct  optimal  optical  controlled  initiation  in  condensed  phase 
systems entails utilizing specific time dependent electric fields to guide the energy flow 
along the desired reaction coordinate pathway.  A preliminary step toward understanding 
and  controlling  energetic  materials  is  deciphering  the  photochemical  dynamics  that 
transpire  when  time  dependent  electric  fields  interact  with  the  energetic  materials.  To 
illuminate  the  path  towards  controlled  energetic  material  photodecomposition  we  have 
investigated the   excitation of nitromethane and perdeuterated nitromethane with 
recently  developed  simultaneous  transient  absorption  and  excited  state  femtosecond 
stimulated  Raman  spectroscopy  techniques.    The  ability  to  simultaneously  measure  the 
dynamic  absorption  and  vibrational  response  due  to  photoexcitation  has  elucidated  the 
electric  field  interaction  and  associated  photochemical  dynamics  in  nitromethane.    Our 
experiments  suggest  nitromethane  shows  fast    1  picosecond  product  formation 
possibly of methyl nitrite after excitation with a 266 nm 150fs pulse.  
Current  optical  initiation  methods  used  in 
detonators  on  energetic  materials  are  non-direct.1  
They utilize a titanium coating on an optical fiber 
to create a plasma which starts initiation through a 
thermal  deflagration 
to  detonation  process.  
Optimal  control  of  optical  initiation  allows  for 
direct  absorption  of  the  laser  light  into  the 
energetic  material.    Using  control  mechanisms  to 
localize  energy  deposition 
photochemical  dynamics  transpire  when  the  time 
dependent electric fields interact with the material.  
Achieving  controlled  photodynamics  requires  a 
femtosecond  laser  pulse  to  guide  the  energy  flow 
along the excited state following a desired reaction 
coordinate  pathway.23  Realizing  direct  optical 
controlled  initiation  in  condensed  phase  systems 
further necessitates propagation of the exothermic 
photochemistry  to  chemical  reactions  that  autocatalyze and grow to initiation.  
Exploding-bridgewire  EBW  detonators  are 
commonly  utilized  at  Los  Alamos  National 
Laboratory.    In  terms  of  safety  they  are  a  step 
above low energy detonators as they require high 
voltage  and  current  to  detonate  but  they  are  not 
immune  to  accidental  initiation  as  a  result  of 
unwanted  electrostatic  discharge  ESD.4    Direct 
optically  initiated  detonators  increase  safety  by 
removing the possibility of unintentional initiation 
from  an  electrical  source  such  as  electrostatic 
discharge or a lightning strike but are plagued by 
the  optical  fiber  damage  threshold  due  to  the 
generation.5   Our goal is to obtain direct initiation 
through active control over the photodynamics of 
the energetic material by exploring the possibility 
laser  energy  necessary 
of  directly  initiating  explosives  with  shaped  time 
Deciphering  the  photochemical  dynamics  that 
transpire  when  time  dependent  electric  fields 
interact  with  energetic  materials 
successful optical control of initiation.  
experiment  ultrafast  shaped 
optimized with evolutionary learning algorithms to 
control electronic excited state dynamics and drive 
molecular  reaction  coordinates  toward  a  desired 
final  state.78  Utilizing  feedback  measurement 
techniques9-12  Figure  1  with  optimal  control 
theory2313-15  decomposition  pathways  can  be 
explored.  Optimization  of  the  pulse  shape  to 
photodecomposition  product  produces  a  laser 
pulse  with  unique  phase  and  amplitude.  The  net 
result  is  the  discovery  of  a  laser  pulse  shape  that 
controls the explosive photochemistry. 
Preliminary  investigations  of  the  explosive 
nitromethane  Figure  2 
nitromethane provide insight into the excited state 
photodynamics  occurring 
picoseconds.    Nitromethane  is  an  ideal  test  bed 
explosive as it has been highly investigated it is a 
small  molecule    7  atoms  CH3NO2  and  it  is  a 
liquid.    Previous  investigations  allow  for  checks 
and balances of our experimental system to ensure 
proper  experimental  measurements. 
relatively  small  molecule 
theoretical  non-adiabatic  excited  state  molecular 
dynamic  NA-ESMD17  simulations  are  more 
easily  calculated  thereby  allowing  for  further 
checks  of  experimental  data. 
homogeneous liquid nitromethane is ideal for our 
optical  experiments.    It  allows  for  high  velocity 
flow  through  a  liquid  cell  to  ensure  each  laser 
pulse hits a new spot of non-reacted neat material.  
Condensed  phase  films  crystals  and  solids  are 
non-homogenous  and  require  moving  the  sample 
to a new spot in-between each laser pulse thereby 
limiting the number of shots per experiment. 
Figure 1. Adaptive feedback control schematic 
for obtaining controlled photochemistry.16 
Specifically  pulse 
  Actively  controlling 
intrinsically  broadband  spectral  distribution  and 
phase  function  of  femtosecond  laser  pulses  in 
efforts  to  drive  excited  state  dynamics  along  a 
photodynamics  of  a  condensed  phase  energetic 
material  allows  exploration  of  the  possibility  of 
directly  initiating  explosives  with  shaped  laser 
pulses.    Optimal  controlled  initiation  experiments 
require  1  optimally  shaped  light  pulses  2  pulse 
shaping  measurements  3 
feedback  measurement 
methods.8  Adaptive learning algorithms utilizing 
direct feedback from a measured system response 
probe  search  for  the  time  dependent  laser 
electric field that best controls the system. 
              Figure 2. Nitromethane 
A general hypothesis in the theoretical18-20 and 
experimental21-28 explosives community is that the 
homolytic bond cleavage  an endothermic process 
that catalyzes violent exothermic decomposition  
is often the critical first step in the chain reaction 
leading  to  detonation.  The  chemistry  of  initiation 
is complex and much research has focused on the 
role  of  electronic  excitations 
decomposition  that  goes  beyond  simple  thermal 
electronic  excitation  is  a  mechanism  contributing 
to  initiation  and  detonation  in  explosive  solids.  It 
seems reasonable that photochemical formation of 
NO2  through  bond-selective  electronic  energy 
localization  into  the  anti-bonding  orbitals  of  N
NO2  ONO2  or  CNO2  bonds  can  be  optimized 
23-2528-31  Kuklja29  concluded 
through pulse shaping quantum control techniques 
to facilitate explosive initiation. 
Nitromethane  is  an  ideal  material  to  test  the 
NO2  photodissociation  hypothesis.  Previous 
studies  on  nitromethane32-36  suggest  four  possible 
photodecomposition  pathways  a  NO2  formation 
dissociation crearrangement to methylnitrite and 
d deprotonation to form the aci ion.  
CH3NO2  h  CH3 NO2  
femtosecond  fs  pump  probe  experiments  on 
nitromethane  NM-d3  and  hypothesize  on  the 
photodissociation process. 
Experimental section 
excite the  of a non-bonding electron of an 
A  266  nm  150  fs  laser  pulse  was  used  to 
O  atom37  in  both  normal  nitromethane  CH3NO2 
and perdeuterated nitromethane CD3NO2 Acros 
99.    Dynamic  photophysical  characterization 
was  performed  using  simultaneous 
absorption  TA  spectroscopy  and  excited  state 
FSRS to determine the photo-response of NM-h3 
The  laser  employed  in  this  work  was  a 
Tisapphire  femtosecond  system  consisting  of  a 
Coherent  Micra  oscillator  and  Legend  USX-HE 
amplifier.  The  1  kHz  2.0  mJ  800  nm  pulse  was 
split  into  pump  and  probe  beams  using  a  33 
beamsplitter.  The higher energy beam was further 
doubled  and  mixed  in  BBO  crystals  to  make  266 
nm light. The 266 nm pump beam was sent to the 
acousto-optical  modulator  pulse 
consisted of a 4-f zero dispersion compressor. The 
lower energy probe beam was further split with a 
supercontinuum  375-750  nm  and  narrow  band 
406 nm beam.  The supercontinuum was produced 
by  focusing  a  spatially  selected  through  an  iris 
bandwidth  selected  20  nm  bandpass  810  nm 
central  wavelength  filter  and  attenuated  fraction 
to  create  a  white 
of  the  10    800  nm  probe  pulse  into  a  2  mm 
quartz  cuvette  filled  with  deionized  water.    The 
remaining 90 800 nm light was passed through a 
6 mm thick type one BBO crystal and two narrow 
band filters to yield a 406 nm pulse with a FWHM 
Transient absorption TA 
breakingrearrangement 
TA is a technique used to obtain the physical 
properties  of  atomic  and  molecular  systems.3839 
for  determining  changes 
nitromethane.  Two  femtosecond  laser  pulses  are 
used  the  2  J  266nm  pump  pulse  that  initiates 
the excited state photochemical dynamics and the 
nJ super-continuum probe pulse 375  750 nm. A 
fraction  of  the  molecules  are  promoted  to  an 
electronically  excited  state  by  the  266  nm  pump 
pulse. The probe pulse is scanned in time delay 
relative to the pump pulse and for each time delay 
the intensities of the probe pulse with and without 
pump pulse are recorded. A differential absorption 
At  spectrum  was  computed  from 
absorption  spectrum  of  the  excited  sample  minus 
the absorption of the spectrum of the sample in the 
ground  state.  The  temporally  resolved  absorption 
changes  give  insight  into  1  the  excited  states 
created by the pump pulse and 2 the excited state 
decomposition  properties  associated  with  NM-h3 
spectroscopy d-FSRS 
Raman  spectroscopy  is  a  powerful  analytical 
method for elucidating vibrational structure and is 
widely  utilized  in  chemical40  biological41  and 
time-resolved  studies.42  We  utilized  the  timestimulated 
femtosecond timescale of both ground and excited 
state.43-46  FSRS  uses 
two  pulses  a  narrow 
bandwidth  1  ps  35    45  cm-1  5    10  J  406 
nm  Raman  pump  pulse  and  a  supercontinuum 
Stokes  probe  pulse  0.1  ps  408    480  nm  20 
nJ to the red of the pump to provide a Stokes field 
overlapping vibrations in the range 200  4000 cm1.47-49  When  the  pump  and  probe  pulses  interact 
with  the  sample  simultaneously  Raman  gain 
features  are  observed  on  top  of  the  continuum 
probe  spectrum  due  to  the  stimulated  Raman 
transitions and are indicative of the bond specific 
vibrational  modes  of  the  sample.  To  probe  the 
electronic excited state the ultrashort 20  50 fs 
266nm  actinic  pump  pulse  first  prepares  a  nonstationary vibrational state on an electronic excited 
state  that  is  subsequently  probed  by  FSRS.46  By 
varying  the  delay  between  the  actinic  pump  and 
FSRS probe the structural evolution of the sample 
due  to  photochemistry  in  the  excited  state  can  be 
monitored.4447  We  call  this  difference  FSRS  dFSRS.  
D-FSRS  allows  observation  of  which  bonds 
are  breaking  and  what  types  of  new  bonds  are 
forming  since  peaks  in  the  spectra  are  bondspecific.  Together  with  the  TA  spectrum  the 
spectrum  provides  a  comprehensive 
description  of  the  excited  state  dynamics  and 
to  directly  probe  nitromethane 
photochemistry NO2 formation aci ion formation 
oxygen dissociation or methyl nitrite formation.  
Results and discussion 
d3  following  the   excitation  at  266  nm  is 
Transient absorption of neat NM-h3 and NM
investigated.  The z-axis TT of the contour plot 
describes  the  change  in  transmitted  probe  light 
normalized to the transmission without the 266 nm 
pump laser.  There are two regions of interest the 
broadband  longer  lived  absorption  from  410-525 
nm  and  the  430-450  nm  dynamic  absorption 
possibly  an  excited  state.      The  possible  excited 
state  in  each  material  was  fit  to  an  exponential 
with lifetimes of of NM-h316514 ps and NM-d3 
13013  ps  respectively.  Both  materials  show 
similar  dynamic  absorption  and  possible  excited 
Figure  3.  Transient  absorption  spectra  top  of 
nitromethane  show  dynamic  absorption  440nm 
and broadband absorption from 410-525 nm. 
Transient  absorption  spectra  are  ideal  for 
exhibiting dynamic absorption changes but do not 
give specific vibrational data on the material.  To 
mechanisms  of  nitromethane  baseline  nonphotoexcited  FSRS  spectra  figure  4  below  are 
obtained  on  both  nitromethane  and  perdeuterated 
nitromethane.  Perdeuterated  nitromethane  is  ideal 
the  combination  CH3NO2 
Raman  signatures  around  1400  cm-1  as  NM-d3 
only  exhibits  NO2  vibrations  around  1400cm-1.  50 
In NM-d3 the CD3 bend contribution occurs around 
1050cm-1 thereby allowing for easier observation 
of NO2 vibration changes.  
Figure  4.  Nitromethane  blue  and  perdeuterated 
nitromethane red femtosecond stimulated Raman 
nitromethane  0.085 
0.07  when  excited  by  266  nm  light.  Product 
reactivity  of  the  initial  material.    Perdeuterurated 
nitromethane  shows  a  similar  reactivity  of  7 
spectra are shown in Figure 6 below. 
Actinic pump pulses 266 nm were then used 
to measure the excited state vibrational response of 
NM-h3  and  NM-d3.  Analysis  of  the  possible 
photochemical paths suggest a that nitro scission 
would exhibit a loss in the 920 cm-1 C-N peak b 
oxygen  dissociation  would  show  changes  in  the 
480 655 and 1400 cm-1 peaks c nitrite formation 
would give small peak shifts all around and d aci 
ion formation would give a new peak at 3333cm1.51  Figure  5  below  shows  the  excited  state  dFSRS results for NM-h3 and NM-d3 around 100 ps 
Figure 5.  Excited state difference femtosecond 
stimulated Raman spectra for NM-h3 blue and 
The  difference-FSRS  spectra  show  vibrational 
changes  due  to  266  nm  excited  state  formation. 
The  dispersive  positive  and  negative  features 
photochemistry  in  the  excited  state.  Additionally 
there  are  notable  decreases  in  the  CH3CD3  and 
NO2  vibrational  peaks.    We  observed  unchanged 
d-FSRS data from 1-150ps excited state excitation 
delay  time  indicating  fast  1ps  formation  of 
final product state.  
 Figure  6.  Product  spectra  of  NM-h3  and  NM-d3. 
Nitromethane  exhibited  8.5  reactivity  upon  266 
nitromethane shows 7 reactivity. 
FSRS  d-FSRS  and  product  spectra  were 
plotted together Figure 7 below and vertical lines 
were  drawn  from  the  specific  FSRS  vibrational 
peaks  through  the  product  and  d-FSRS  data  in 
efforts to show specific peak changes.  Difference 
and product spectra show slight peak shifts of all 
vibrational components.  There was no evidence of 
NO2  elimination  as  the  C-N  stretch  920cm-1  is 
still  present.    There  was  no  obvious  peak  at 
3330cm-1  indicating  no  presence  of  the  aci  ion.  
Oxygen  dissociation  would  have  presented 
changes  only  in  the  NO2  peaks  at  480  655  and 
1400cm-1  but  vibrational  changes  were  seen 
through  out  all  vibrational  peaks 
suggesting  methyl  nitrite  formation  from  the  266 
Product spectra were determined by adding 
back  a  fractional  amount  of  the  initial  FSRS 
spectrum  to  the  d-FRSR  spectrum  such  that  the 
negative  peaks  are  removed.    The  percentage  of  
FSRS  spectrum  needed  to  remove  the  negative 
peaks  indicates  the  amount  of  NM-h3  and  NM-d3 
reacted.  The  following  three  equations  illustrate 
the method used to calculate the product spectra. 
We  have  investigated  the   266  nm 
150fs  photoexcitation  of  condensed 
nitromethane  and  perdeuterated  nitromethane.  
Excited state d-FSRS measurements over 150 ps 
showed  similar  vibrational  peaks  regardless  of 
delay  time  indicating  observation  of  a  primary 
photoproduct in 1 ps.  Slight shifts between the 
FSRS  and  d-FSRS  vibrational  peaks  imply  the 
primary  photoproduct  is  likely  methyl  nitrite.    In 
contrary  the  TA  spectra  show  a  possible  excited 
state  absorption  around  440  nm  with  a  lifetime 
165ps  suggesting  a  small  fraction  of 
photoproduct  absorbs  in  the  visible  and  reacts  in 
solution  in  100s  of  ps.    Further  investigation  is 
Microwave Interferometry for Understanding 
Deflagration-to-Detonation and Shock-to-Detonation Transitions in 
Joseph W. Tringe Ron J. Kane Kevin S. Vandersall  
Mark C. Converse Frank Garcia and Craig M. Tarver 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94550 
Energetic Materials Center 
Abstract.  Diagnostics  to  interrogate  shock  and  deflagration  fronts  in  situ  without 
embedded  sensors  are  desirable  to  improve  the  understanding  of  front  initiation  and 
propagation. Here we report on microwave interferometry MI1-5 measurements that have 
been successfully used for characterization of deflagration-to-detonation transition DDT 
and shock-to-detonation transition SDT events in porous energetic materials.  We use 
frequencies in the range 12.5-26.6 GHz to observe the development of detonation fronts 
which are highly reflective to microwaves. In this work the MI technique was used to 
measure  the  transition  to  detonation  in  both  DDT  and  SDT  scenarios  for  porous 
explosives HMX and Composition B.  Data was obtained through a silica window for the 
case of DDT and inside a non-ideal waveguide in an SDT configuration using appropriate 
coupled  waveguides.  The  calculated  velocities  based  on  the  MI  Doppler  period  were 
comparable  but  higher  than  were  measured  with  ionization  pins  DDT  and  Manganin 
gauges SDT with better agreement to the Manganin gauge data in the SDT experiment. 
Details of the approach and measurements are presented together with a discussion of the 
possible  use  of  this  technique  to  measure  the  in  situ  fraction  reacted  with  insights  on 
frequency ranges and configurations desired to make this an effective measurement. 
Microwave interferometry MI is well-suited 
to  characterize  reacting fronts  in  explosives  since 
microwaves  can  penetrate  deep  into  explosive 
samples  without  modifying 
provide information on the position of fronts with 
mm  scale  spatial  resolution.1  2  4  6-8  A  second 
advantage of MI is that the amplitude of the return 
signal  may  be  correlated  with  the  density  of  hot 
spots  being  created  by  a  developing  detonation 
deflagration-to  detonation  transition  DDT  often 
require  heavy  confinement  by  metal  cases  which 
shock-to-detonation 
present  an  obstacle  to  microwave  interrogation. 
experiments  can  present  a  large-area  detonating 
surface  inside  an  insulating  cylinder  to  a  smaller 
microwave probe such that the microwaves do not 
propagate  through  an  ideal  waveguide.  In  this 
work  we  demonstrate  experimental  conditions 
which enable characterization of heavily-confined 
insulator-confined  detonating 
surfaces with MI. We also apply the Ignition and 
Growth model to porous explosives and compare 
the predictions of this model with our observed MI 
data  to  provide  insight  into  the  mechanisms 
underlying transitions to detonation.  
Experimental configuration 
For  the  characterization  of  DDT  12.5  GHz 
signals launched at 13 dBm were reflected from a 
detonation front developed in a cylinder of HMX 
powder.  The  powder  was  heavily  confined  in  a 
steel cylinder with a 25.4 mm inner diameter 76.2 
mm outer diameter and an overall length of 342.8 
mm  it  was  hand  packed  to  62  theoretical 
maximum  density  TMD.  Microwave  signals 
were  launched  from  a  waveguide  proximate  to  a 
conical  silica  window  25.4  mm  high  located  at 
the  end  of  the  cylinder  remote  from  the  DDT 
initiation  location.  Ignition  was  initiated  with  a 
thermite  ignitor  as  described  previously.4  9  MI 
results  were  correlated  with 
ionization pins inserted through the exterior metal 
wall  along  the  length  of  the  cylinder.  Figure  1 
shows the geometry as simulated using the Ansys 
HFSS  High  Frequency  Structural  Simulator 
finite  element  code  with  an  inset  displaying  a 
photograph  of  the  silica  window  configuration 
used for this experiment.   
Figure  1.  HFSS  Simulation  of  DDT  geometry. 
False  color  indicates  magnitude  of  the  electric 
field.    Inset    photo  of  the  remote  end  of  the 
conical  silica  window  through  which  microwave 
signals are introduced into the explosive cylinder.   
MI was also used to characterize the shock-todetonation  transition  SDT  in  a  porous  bed  of 
Composition  B  hand  packed  to  64  TMD  as 
in  Figure  3.  Manganin  piezoresistive 
pressure  gauges  were  placed  between  each 
explosive  layer.    Explosive  layers  were  packed 
inside  Teflon  rings  with  an  inner  diameter  of  70 
mm  outer  diameter  of  90  mm  and  thicknesses 
varying from 3 to 10 mm. A sabot with a Teflon 
flyer was used to impact a 5 mm thick aluminum 
plate  in  front  of  the  explosive  at  540  ms.  The 
impact event was interrogated with a 0 dBm 26.6 
GHz signal launched from a waveguide behind the 
explosive and a 10 mm thick Teflon backing plate.  
Figure 2. Experimental geometry of porous Comp 
B  impacted  by  a  Teflon  flyer.  Manganin  gauges 
are placed between porous layers at 0 3 10 20 30 
and 40 mm depth relative to the Al plate interface. 
Experimental Results 
After  analysis  of  the  microwave  signals  for 
the  DDT  experiment  the  expected  interferencegenerated sinusoidal pattern is observed soon after 
the  acceleration  of  the  deflagration  front  into  a 
detonation  front.  This  data  shown  in  Figure  2 
superimposed  with  the  pin  timing  is  obtained  by 
multiplying  the  carrier  signal  with  the  reflected 
wave signal followed by low-pass filtering of the 
product.  The  reflected  power  as  a  function  of 
detonation  front  position  was  predicted  by  the 
HFSS  simulation  and  correlates  well  with  this 
signal history assuming the detonation front is an 
ideal reflecting surface.  
amplitude  of  the  pressure  rise  approximately 
doubles by the time the pulse reaches the gauge at 
20 mm approximately 3 s later indicating that a 
well-defined detonation wave has formed. 
Figure 4.  Pressure as a function of time from five 
Manganin gauges distributed at 0 3 10 20 and 40 
mm into the Comp B explosive. 
Figure 5 shows the gauge arrival timing as a 
function  of  position  for  the  6  Manganin  gauges. 
Here time is taken to be relative to the first gauges 
detonation  wave  likely  forms  between  7  and  10 
microseconds after the explosive impact and that 
the velocity of the detonation wave is 5.94 mms. 
Figure 5.  Manganin gauge position vs. reporting 
time.  Detonation appears to initiate between 7 and 
10 s after the reporting of the first gauge at time 0 
with a detonation velocity of 5.94 mms. 
Figure  3.  a  Pin  time  as  a  function  of  position 
within  the  HE  column  b  Sinusoidal  pattern  of 
reflected  microwave  energy  with  pin  timing 
indicators superimposed 
From Figure 3a key pin positions and times are 
summarized in Table 1. 
Table 1.  Time position 2-point velocity for pins 
For the SDT experiment data from a subset of 
the Manganin gauge records is shown in Figure 4.   
The  low  pressure  at  the  gauge  at  3  mm  suggests 
that  detonation  has  not  yet  initiated  in  this 
position.  A  much  more  abrupt  pressure  rise  is 
observed  at  the  gauge  at  10  mm  however.  The 
         MI data for the full shot record is shown in 
Figure 6a. As was done for the DDT experiment 
this  data  was  obtained  by  multiplying  the  carrier 
signal  with  the  reflected  wave  signal  then  lowpass  filtering  the  product.  A  moving  detonation 
wave  or  other  reflected  front  is  expected  to 
produce an oscillating signal because of the timevarying  change  of  phase  of  the  reflected  signal.   
The time period of the shock transit and initiation 
is shown highlighted in a box in Figure 6a.  
Figure 6. a MI for the full shot record time with 
0  time  referenced  to  the  same  value  used  for  the 
Manganin  gauge  data  shown  in  Figure  2.    The 
times  shown  in  b  are  highlighted  by  a  box.  b  
Expanded  view  of  MI  record  with  best-defined 
oscillating signal highlighted by a box.  Additional 
periods beyond gauge 8 are not included because 
these correspond to time after the detonation wave 
transits the explosiveTeflon interface. 
An expanded view of Figure 6a is shown in 
Figure 6b with Manganin gauge timing indicated 
by arrows. A steady rise in amplitude begins soon 
after the reporting time for Gauge 3 3 mm into the 
detonation  wave  at  Gauge  8  at  the  end  of  the  40 
mm of Comp B is not particularly well-defined it 
appears that the oscillating MI record may persist 
after  the  arrival  of  the  detonation  wave  at  the 
Teflon at 43 s. There may also be a time offset 
related  to  a  curved  detonation  front  and  the  fact 
that the microwave waveguide was radially offset 
Ignition and Growth Modeling of Low Density 
Composition B Shock Initiation 
The Ignition and Growth reactive flow model 
10-12 uses two Jones-Wilkins-Lee JWL equations 
of state EOS in the temperature dependent form 
                 p  Ae-R
V  CvTV           1 
where  p  is  pressure  V  is  relative  volume  T  is 
temperature   is  the  Gruneisen  coefficient  Cv  is 
the average heat capacity and A B R1 and R2 are 
constants. The reaction rate equation is 
where  F  is  fraction  reacted  t  is  time  in  s    is  
current density o is initial density p is pressure in 
Mbars and I G1 G2 a b c d e g x y and z are 
constants.  A set of parameters for Composition B 
at  high  density  1.712  gcm3  were  developed  by 
Urtiew  et  al.13  based  on  embedded  mangnain 
pressure  gauge  records  and  other  shock  initiation 
data. To model lower density shock initiation the 
unreacted  JWL  EOS  was  modified  based  on  the 
lower  strength  and  sound  velocity  of  the  porous 
explosive  by  lowering  the  value  of  A  for  the 
unreacted Composition B and the fraction ignited 
Figmax parameter was increased from 0.022 to 0.09 
to  account  for  the  greater  number  of  hot  spot 
formation sites. A new JWL product equation for 
Composition  B  based  on  detonation 
overdriven  experimental  data14  was  also  used  in 
this  modeling.    Similar  changes  were  also  made 
for  modeling  the  shock  initiation  of  two  lower 
initial  densities  of HMX  including  the 1.2  gcm3 
material used in the DDT experiments.15 16  Table 
Composition B in this shock initiation shot.   
the  parameters  for 
Table 2. Composition B modeling parameters 
Initial density o 1.115 gcm3 
To   298K  Eo  0.0544 
The  results  of  modeling  the  SDT  experiment  are 
shown  in  Figs.  7  and  8.    Figure  7  shows  the 
calculated pressure histories for the six Manganin 
gauges  and  Fig.  8  shows  the  corresponding 
fraction  reacted  histories  in  the  Composition  B 
next  to  the  gauges.      The  calculated  pressure 
increases  in  Fig.  7  are  similar  to  the  measured 
pressures  in  Fig.  4.    The  increases  in  fractions 
reacted as functions of time and distances in Fig. 8 
are the direct causes of the MI signals. 
Figure 7. Calculated pressure histories in reacting 
Composition  B  during  the  SDT  experiment  with 
Manganin data shown in Figures 4 and 5. 
Figure  8.  Calculated  fraction  reacted  histories  in 
Composition  B  during  the  SDT  experiment  with 
Manganin data shown in Figures 4 and 5.  
Hot  spot  formation  is  critical  for  both  DDT 
and  SDT  processes.  During  DDT  there  is  a 
progression of reactive flow processes that occur  
conductive  deflagration  convective  deflagration 
coalescence  of  pressure  wavelets  to  form  a  solid 
plug  behind  a  leading  shock  wave  and  finally 
SDT in the porous explosive beyond the plug.  The 
density  and  size  of  hot  spots  rapidly  accelerates 
during  these  events.  A  complex  model  of  these 
deflagration and porous compaction processes has 
been developed in ALE3D by Kercher et al.15 For 
the SDT process Kercher et al. used the Ignition 
parameterized  for  low-density  HMX 65  TMD 
using embedded Manganin pressure gauge data.16 
In general the velocity of the detonation wave 
may be independently estimated from the period of 
the MI signal oscillation.  The front velocity Us is 
calculated from the Doppler period T of the return 
signal  and  the  microwave  wavelength  g  inside 
the interrogated medium   
g can be estimated by 
cid1847cid3046cid3090cid3282cid2870cid3021   
cid3090cid3116cid3496cid3106cid3293cid2879cid4672cid3090cid3116cid3090cid3278cid3416 cid4673cid3118 
where  0  is  the  vacuum  wavelength  of  the 
microwave signal.  c is the cutoff wavelength of 
the  signal  in  the  waveguide.  r  is  the  relative 
dielectric  constant  of 
interrogation frequency.8 For a circular waveguide 
with  radius  r  the  cutoff  wavelength  for  the 
dominant TE11 mode is in vacuum given by 
cid2019cid3030cid2868 cid2870cid3095cid3045
cid2869.cid2876cid2872cid2869cid2870 
Since the waveguide is filled with a dielectric with 
constant of the porous explosive powder using the 
unified mixing equation 
r  c      c0r.    We  estimate  the  dielectric 
cid2987cid3291cid3290cid3298cid3279cid3280cid3293cid2879cid2870cid2878cid2973cid2987cid3291cid3290cid3298cid3279cid3280cid3293cid2879cid2869cid1858
cid2987cid3291cid3290cid3298cid3279cid3280cid3293cid2879cid2869
explosive at 100 TMD and  is a dimensionless 
where f is the fraction of explosive in the explosive 
powderair mixture exp is the dielectric constant of 
cid2987cid3280cid3299cid3291cid2879cid2869
cid2987cid3280cid3299cid3291cid2879cid2870cid2878cid2973cid2987cid3280cid3299cid3291cid2879cid2869 
fraction f is 0.62 and   from Equation 4 for this 
parameter  that  depends  on  the  solid  permittivity 
and its volume fraction.17 18 
For  the  HMX  DDT  experiment  we  assume  the 
dielectric  constant  of  HMX  HMX  at 
measurement  frequency  12.5  GHz  0    23  mm 
has  the  same  value  as  has  been  estimated  at  10 
GHz  3.48.19  We  further  assume  that  the  volume 
dielectric  constant  and  volume  fraction  is  1.2.18  
The  Doppler  period  T  is  1.3  s  Figure  3b.   
Using  Equations  1-4  with  these  values  leads  to  a 
30  overestimate  of  the  6.1  mms  ionization 
pin-measured detonation velocity.  This difference 
is  not  likely  due  to  compaction  of  the  HMX 
powder  ahead  of  the  detonation  wave.  From 
Equations 3-6 we estimate that the HMX powder 
would need to be almost 90 TMD to create the 
r    powder    2.84  which  would  be  necessary  to 
account  for  the  apparently  increased  velocity  as 
determined  by  MI.  Additional  experiments  are 
necessary  to  demonstrate  the  lack  of  compaction 
the  Comp  B  SDT  experiment 
beginning  of  the  best-defined  oscillations  at  37 
s in principle corresponds to the initiation of the 
detonation wave. Since the gauge at 0 mm reports 
at 30 s this time corresponds to 7 s after the 
gauge  reports  consistent  with  the  times  reported 
by  subsequent  Manganin  gauges  as  shown  in 
Figures 4 and 5.    
We  assume  that  CompB  at  26.6  GHz  0    11 
mm has the same value as has been estimated at 
10 GHz 3.29.19 The value of f is known from the 
density  of  the  pellets  to  be  0.64  and   for  this 
  c0r  8.64 cm with r  powder  1.91 from 
dielectric  constant  and  volume  fraction  is  also 
1.2.18  We  also  assume  the  waveguide  has  the 
radius of the Comp B cylinders 70 mm so that c 
Equation 4.   From the data shown in Figure 6b 
there are at least three unambiguous cycles in the 
MI signal over 1.9 s immediately before the last 
Manganin gauge report time so that T  0.64 s. 
Then from the above parameters and Equations 3 
and  4  the  calculated  Us    6.5  mms.  This 
represents a 10 overestimate relative to the 5.9 
mms determined by the Manganin gauges.    
       Interestingly  we  observe  there  is  slower 
increase  in  MI  signal  amplitude  starting  about  a 
microsecond before Manganin gauge 3 reports at 3 
mm beyond the aluminum barrier. The amplitude 
peaks about 0.7 s later. If we take this time to be 
half a Doppler period then the implied velocity is 
420  ms  which  is  comparable  540  ms  impact 
velocity  of  the  Teflon  flyer  into  the  aluminum 
barrier in front of the Comp B.    
As  previously  noted  microwave  reflections 
to  an  unambiguous  high-frequency 
Doppler period Figure 6 at about 2 microseconds 
before the Manganin gauge at 40 mm reports. This 
gauge shows a fast pressure rise which we attribute 
to  a  detonation  wave.  From  the  fraction  reacted 
history  calculated  with  the  Ignition  and  Growth 
model  shown  in  Figure  8  the  2  microseconds 
preceding the 40 mm gauge corresponds to about 
20 reacted throughout the depth of the explosive.  
The amplitude increase of the MI signal over this 
time period then corresponds to the faster reaction 
of  the  explosive  in  the  20-40  mm  depth  of  the 
explosive.  Unfortunately  more 
analysis  is  complicated  by  the  small  number  of 
Doppler  periods  over  the  transition  time  in  this 
experiment  and  the  fact  that  the  transition  to 
detonation  corresponds  with 
explosive sample so that a steady-state condition is 
not observed.  In the future with higher frequency 
interrogation  however  MI  may  be  used  more 
effectively  to  calibrate  the  Ignition  and  Growth 
model by more accurately and directly measuring 
the reacted fraction.   
We  experimentally  demonstrate  that  MI  can 
detonation  in  both  DDT  and  SDT  scenarios  for 
porous  explosives  HMX  and  Composition  B.  
Useful  data  is  obtained  through  a  silica  window 
DDT  and  inside  a  non-ideal  waveguide  SDT 
using  appropriate  coupled  waveguides.  The 
calculated  velocities  based  on  the  MI  Doppler 
period  are  comparable  but  higher  than  were 
measured  with  ionization  pins  and  Manganin 
piezoresistive gauges with better agreement to the 
Manganin gauge data in the SDT experiment. We 
also present results of calculations made with the 
Ignition and Growth model for low-density HMX 
powder  and  Composition  B.  For  Composition  B 
impacted by a 540 ms Teflon flyer the calculated 
transition to detonation time and pressures matches 
the transition characterized by the Manganin gauge 
record.  Additional  information  about  the  fraction 
reacted in the Ignition and Growth model may be 
provided  by  MI  data  but  higher  frequency 
interrogation or a longer transition to steady state 
are needed to more conclusively demonstrate this 
This research was partially supported by the Joint 
DoD-DOE  Munitions  Technology  Development 
Program. This work performed under the auspices 
of  the  U.  S.  Department  of  Energy  by  Lawrence 
Livermore  National  Laboratory  under  Contract Laser-induced shock chemistry of energetic materials 
Jennifer L. Gottfried 
U.S. Army Research Laboratory 
Aberdeen Proving Ground MD 
Abstract. Understanding the chemistry that occurs in the reaction front of an explosive 
detonation is extremely difficult due to the short time-scale and violent release of energy 
in  the  form  of  heat  sound  light  and  blast.    In  addition full-scale  detonation  testing  is 
quite expensive.  The ability to study the chemical reactions and properties of explosives 
in  a  small-scale  laboratory  environment  would  greatly  benefit  the  development  of 
improved  explosive  formulations.    The  feasibility  of  exploiting  laser-induced  plasma 
chemistry to study the chemical reactions between metallic nanoparticles and molecular 
explosives such as cyclotrimethylene trinitramine RDX has been demonstrated.  Using 
this  method  it  has  been  confirmed  that  the  presence  of  aluminum  in  an  RDX-based 
explosion  results  in  an  increased  amount  of  unreacted  carbon.    In  addition  the  shock 
wave generated in the air by the laser-induced plasma can be used to predict the explosive 
properties  of  the  ablated  material  i.e.  energetic  materials  generate  faster  laser-induced 
shock velocities than non-energetic materials.  
mechanisms  of  combustion  thermal  explosion 
and  detonation  is  essential  in  order  to  develop 
more  efficient  explosives  and  propellants.    In 
addition  the  chemical  products  produced  during 
performance so an understanding of the chemical 
reactions  involved  during  the  decomposition  of 
component mixtures is crucial.  In a recent study 
Song  et  al.  investigated  the  formation  of  C  and 
aluminized-cyclotrimethylene 
trinitramine  RDX  shock  tube  explosion.1    Both 
unreacted carbon C C2 and AlO decrease rocket 
performance.    By  monitoring  the  C2  and  AlO 
emission they observed that increasing the quantity 
of  micron-sized  Al  particles  added  to  the  RDX 
subsequently studied the effect of nano-aluminum 
experimental setup.2 
the  detonation  of  RDX 
increased  C2  emission. 
Here  we  demonstrate  an  alternate  approach 
for  studying  the  chemical  reactions  of  molecular 
explosives  and  metallic  nanoparticles. 
laser-induced  breakdown 
approach  based  on 
involves  generating 
metallic  nanoparticles  via 
laser  ablation  and 
studying  the  chemical  reactions  that  occur  in  the 
laser-induced  plasma  by  monitoring  the  timeresolved  emission  spectra.    LIBS  is  an  analytical 
technique  that  has  been  widely  investigated  over 
the  past  several  decades  for  both  qualitative  and 
quantitative  material 
applications  include  the  detection  of  explosives.4  
It  is  only  recently  that  a  few  groups  have  started 
investigating  the  chemical  reactions  involving 
explosive  materials  that  occur  during  the  lifetime 
of  the  laser-induced  plasma  tens  to  hundreds  of 
microseconds  and  the  subsequent  effect  on  the 
In  this  work  the  laser  ablation  of  thin  film 
residues  of  RDX  on  various  metal  substrates 
generating  nanoenergetic  particles  has  been 
combined  with  the  observation  of  time-resolved 
resulting  hightemperature  plasma.    The  relative  concentrations 
of C C2 CN H N and O as well as any other 
metal substrate-related atomic molecular or ionic 
species  emitting  from  200-940  nm  were  tracked 
during the lifetime of the plasma typically 1 ms.  
Several  experiments  designed  to  understand  the 
time-dependence  of  species  formation  in  the 
plasma and to determine the effect of metals on the 
chemistry of RDX were performed. 
to  providing  a  method  for 
characterizing  the  high-temperature  chemistry  of 
energetic  material  formulations  the  laser-induced 
plasma  results  in  the  generation  of  a  shock  wave 
that propagates into the background gas. Thermal 
converted  to  kinetic  energy  resulting  in  high 
expansion  velocities.  The  expansion  of  the  high 
pressure  vapor  acts  as  a  piston  driving  into  the 
surrounding atmosphere compressing the ambient 
gas at its front into a thin shell. For laser ablation 
the force of this piston depends on the volume of 
gas produced which is related to both the ablated 
mass and to the temperature reached in the plasma 
plume. Energy is transferred to the surrounding air 
through  a  combination  of  thermal  conduction 
radiative  transfer  and  heating  by  the  resulting 
shock  wave.  At  high  laser  irradiances  shock 
heating dominates.8  
The  laser-induced  shock  wave  is similar  to  a 
detonation  phenomenon  and  is  called  a  blast 
wave.9-11  The  presence  of  various  contact  fronts 
the  ionization  front  and  the  main  external  shock 
front  have  been  confirmed  through  shadowgraph 
imaging e.g. Callies et al.12 
In  a  second  study  we  have  measured  the 
shock wave velocity generated from a large variety 
of  inert  and  energetic  materials  in  order  to 
the  effect  of  exothermic  chemical 
reactions  on  the  laser-induced  shock  wave.  The 
ultimate  goal  of  this  research  is  to  develop  a 
laboratory-scale  method  for estimating detonation 
performance  using  milligram  quantities  of 
energetic materials. Kleine et al. have verified that 
blast  wave  scaling 
laws  which  have  been 
confirmed for detonation tests ranging from 1-109 
grams  also  apply  to  charges  in  the  milligram 
range.13  Large-scale  testing  hundreds  to  millions 
of  grams  of  explosive  is  expensive  and  timeconsuming  in  addition  diagnostics  are  difficult 
because of the inherently destructive nature of the 
tests  and  the  opaqueness  of  the  early  fireball.  In 
many cases scaling up production of new types of 
energetic  materials  for 
prohibitively  expensive  without  some  a  priori 
assurance of performance gains over conventional 
explosives. The ideal small-scale test on the other 
require  any  scale-up  or 
formulation  of  potential  new  energetic  materials 
and  could  safely  be  performed  in  a  laboratory 
environment with minimal cost per test. 
To  study  the  laser-induced  plasma  chemistry 
of RDX with different metallic nanoparticles two 
NdYAG  lasers  Continuum  Surelite  1064  nm 
maximum 420  mJ  per  laser  were  focused  onto 
the  sample  surface  with  a  10-cm  lens  interpulse 
delay2  s.  The  plasma  emission  was  directed 
into  a  400  m  fiber  optic  using  a  pierced  mirror 
setup. An echelle spectrometer Catalina Scientifc 
EMU-65 was paired with an electron multiplying 
CCD  detector  Andor  iXon  to  collect  the  highresolution  emission  spectra  2001000  nm  under 
an  argon  flow  at  varying  time  delays  1  s  gate 
width.  The  RDX  was  suspended  in  acetonitrile 
and  applied  to  the  high-purity  metal  substrate 
surfaces  in residue  concentrations of 2.5 gmm2 
approximately  13  g  of  RDX  was  sampled  with 
each  laser  shot.  The  substrates  used  for  this 
experiment  were  high  purity  metal  foils  obtained 
99.999  Ni  99.98  Sn  99.998  and  Ti 
99.998.    Fifty  single-shot  spectra  of  RDX 
residue on each of the pure metal substrates were 
  A  complete  description  of 
For  the  shock  experiments  the  pulse  from  a 
Quantel Brilliant B NdYAG laser 1064 nm 900 
mJ  was  focused  onto  the  sample  surface  with  a 
10-cm lens. Videos of the shock waves generated 
in  air  by  the  laser-induced  plasmas  from  various 
inert and energetic material samples were recorded 
with a Photron SA5 high-speed camera 84000 fps 
with  1  s  shutter  using  the  schlieren  imaging 
3-nitro-l24-triazole-5-one 
Energetic  material  samples  were  obtained 
from  colleagues  at  the  U.S.  Army  Research 
Laboratory  materials  investigated  included  black 
13dinitrobenzene  m-DNB  14-dinitrobenezene  pDNB  24-dinitroanisole  DNAN  trinitrotoluene 
hexanitrostilbene  HNS  triaminotrinitrobenzene 
cyclotetramethylene 
hexanitrohexaazaisowurtzitane 
polyethylene  composition-B  60  RDX  40 
TNT  and  pentolite  50  PETN  50  TNT. 
Non-explosive  materials 
including  ammonium 
melamine  C3H6N6  sugar  sucrose  C12H22O11 
nanographite  NG  1-4  m  wide  50  nm  thick 
diamond  grit  25-35  m  and  graphite  lubricant 
micron-sized  particles  were  obtained 
various  commercial  sources.  All  samples  were 
prepared on the same substrate  double-sided tape 
affixed  to  a  glass  micro  slide  2575  mm. 
Approximately  10-20  mg  of  each  material  was 
applied  to  the  tape  surface  and  distributed  across 
the  surface  with  a  spatula.  Excess  material  was 
removed  by  gently  tapping  the  slide.  Since  the 
shock wave from each laser shot removed material 
from  a  diameter  approximately  500  larger  than 
the diameter of the focused laser subsequent laser 
shots were spaced to avoid disturbed areas of the 
sample  surface.  A  total  of  5-8  laser  shots  were 
obtained from each sample slide. 
Background-corrected 
intensities normalized to the total emission for the 
atomic  and  molecular  species  relevant  to  RDX 
were  tracked  over  the  first  10  s  of  the  laserinduced  plasma  lifetime  figure  1.  Observed 
emission  features  include  C  247.856  nm  H 
746.831  nm  and  O 
777.194777.417  nm  CN  388.340  nm  C2 
516.520  nm  and  AlO  484.220  nm.    Because 
the  RDX  residue  was  applied  to  an  aluminum 
substrate  Al  I  and  Al  II  emission  features  were 
 Fig. 1. CN C2 and AlO emission along with the 
ionization ratio as a function of gate delay.  
observed  in  addition  to  AlO  formed  by  the 
reaction  of  the  Al  from  the  substrate  and  O 
liberated from the RDX.  
While  the  peak  intensities  for  the  atomic 
species  steadily  decrease  with  increasing  gate 
delay the molecular species exhibit very different 
time-dependent  behavior 
plasma.    Of  the  three  molecules  observed  in  the 
LIBS spectra of RDX on aluminum only the CN 
is present at very early times in the plasma lifetime 
since some CN fragments are formed by the initial 
laser ablation of the RDX molecule. These initial 
CN fragments are dissociated into atomic C and N 
atoms  by  collisions  in  the  high  temperature 
plasma.16  The ratio of singly ionized Al 466 nm 
to neutral Al 309 nm is also shown in figure 1.  
The  excitation  temperatures  calculated  based  on 
the  Boltzmann  two-line  method  using  the  Al  I 
lines 309 nm and 394 nm follow the same trend 
as  the  ionization  ratio    both  decrease  as  the 
plasma  cools.    The  calculated  temperatures  drop 
from 11000 K at a gate delay of 0 s to around 
3700 K at a gate delay of 10 s.  As the plasma 
begins  to  cool  CN  C2  and  AlO  form  from 
chemical  reactions  e.g.  1-416  517  and  618 
resulting  in  an  increase  in  molecular  emission  at 
 C  N  M  CN  M         
Al  CO2  AlO  CO         
The formation of molecular species during the 
lifetime  of  the  laser-induced  plasma  is  clear 
evidence that chemistry is occurring in the highly 
environment.    While  most  LIBS  practitioners 
therefore limit the detector gate width in order to 
minimize  changes  in  the  emission  intensities  at 
the  expense  of  sensitivity  our  goal  was  to 
determine  if  useful  information  about  the  species 
involved in the plasma chemistry can be obtained 
using longer gate widths. 
Selected regions of spectra 50 s gate width 
from  five  high-purity  substrates  with  and without 
RDX are shown in figure 2. The increase in the C 
H  N  O  and  CN  emission  with  the  presence  of 
RDX  dotted  red  traces  is  clearly  visible. In  this 
experiment  very  little  air  was  entrained  in  the 
laser-induced plasma so most of the nitrogen used 
in the formation of CN originates from the RDX.  
The  highest  excitation 
RDXmetal  plasmas  calculated  using  the  Ar  I 
lines  at  750.387  and  751.465  nm  correspond  to 
TiAlCuSnNi  table  1.  The  Ti  substrate 
plasma  had  the  greatest  increase  in  temperature 
with the addition of RDX while the plasma for the 
Sn substrate remained essentially unchanged. The 
higher  plasma  temperature  for  the  blank  Sn 
implies less laser energy coupled to the sample and 
more energy went into heating the plasma.  In this 
case there would be fewer ablated Sn atoms in the 
plasma to affect the chemistry. 
Table  1.    Calculated  excitation  temperatures  for 
metal substrates with and without RDX residue. 
11639  398  11434  585 
Figure 3 shows three contour plots created by 
plotting the relative emission intensities of species 
within the laser-induced plasma normalized to the 
Ar  line  at  763.511  nm  generated  by  ablation  of 
RDX  residue  on  the  five  substrates.    These  plots 
illustrate  the  variations  in  the  plasma  chemistry 
caused  by  the  different  substrates.    Figure  3a 
shows  that  as  the  C  intensity  in  the  plasma 
increases the CN intensity increases as well. The 
CN  intensity  is  essentially  independent  of  the 
atomic  N  content  however  which  indicates  that 
equation  2  is  the  dominant  mechanism  for 
formation  of  CN  in  the  plasma  rather  than  1.  
The O intensity increases as the N increases while 
increasing  C  content  results  in  decreasing  O 
Figure  3b.  This  result  can  be  explained  by  the 
formation  of  CO  and  CO2  in  the  plasma  via  the 
Fig. 2.  Selected regions of LIBS spectra for a Al b Cu c Ni d Sn e Ti with dotted red and without solid 
the  presence  of  CN  can  be  explained  by  the 
The concentration of atomic O in the laser-induced 
plasma is therefore highest in conditions of low C 
To further understand the effect of metals on 
the  chemical  reactions  of  RDX  in  the  laserinduced plasma Al powder 75 m was mixed 
with the RDX in varying concentrations 01 11 
21 and 41 and applied to the five substrates.  Al 
is rapidly oxidized by oxygen O O2 CO2 H2O 
and possibly other species such as NO N2O and 
NO2  to  form  AlO  before  reaching  its  final 
equilibrium  state  alumina  Al2O3.20    Because  of 
the high heat of formation for Al2O3 the addition 
of  Al  to  explosive  formulations  results  in  a 
considerable increase in the heat of explosion.  In 
laser-induced  plasma 
temperature  for  each  substrate  increased  by  as 
much as 55 with the addition of Al powder to the 
As  the  concentration  of  Al  powder  was 
increased  the  substrate  emission  lines  decreased 
due to increased residue surface coverage and the 
Al emission lines increased. While the C H N H 
and  CN  emission  lines  decreased  with  increasing 
Al possibly because less RDX was being sampled 
in  the  plasma  the  C2  and  AlO  increased  on  all 
substrates figure 4.  This result is confirmed by 
the conclusions of Song et al.1 who observed the 
increase  in  C2  and  AlO  emission  with  increasing 
Al  content  during  an  aluminized-RDX  explosion 
in a shock tube.  The higher the concentration of 
Al in the laser-induced plasma the more O the Al 
scavenges to form AlO and the less O available to 
react  with  the  C  to  form  CO.    This  results  in  an 
increase  in  condensed  phase  C  aggregate  soot 
Although the plasma temperature 10000 K 
is higher than typical detonation temperatures up 
to  6000  K21  localized  regions  of  elevated 
temperatures  behind  the  propagating  shock  wave 
are characteristic of the shock initiation process in 
porous  and  heterogeneous  explosives  and  can 
exceed  10000  K.22  Peak  detonation  pressures  in 
the  chemical  reaction  zone  can  exceed  40  GPa23 
laser intensities 1 TWcm2 produce similar shock 
Fig. 3. Contour plots for the a N C CN b N C 
O  and  c  CN  N  O  emission  intensities  of  RDX 
on five different metal substrates Al Cu Ni Sn 
Equations 7 and 8 are important reactions 
in the decomposition of RDX since the formation 
of gaseous products such as CO and CO2 is highly 
exothermic  and  results  in  the  liberation  of  large 
quantities of energy upon detonation.19  Figure 3c 
shows  that  as  the  CN  intensity  increases  the  O 
intensity decreases.  This decrease in O content in 
pressures.24  Another  difference  is  the  unconfined 
nature of the current experiments  as opposed to 
the propagation of chemical reactions through the 
bulk  energetic  material  the  reactions  occur  in  a 
plasma  expanding  into  the  air  above  the  residue 
distinctions  useful 
information  about  the  high-temperature  chemical 
reactions  of  energetic  materials  can  be  obtained 
Fig. 4. As the concentration of Al in the RDXAl 
mixture  was  increased  the  C2  top  and  AlO 
bottom  emission  from  the  laser-induced  plasma 
increased on all five metal substrates including the 
Al and Cu substrates. 
Laser-induced Shock Waves 
Figure  5  shows  snapshots  from  the  schlieren 
videos 12000 fps at full camera resolution 9.8 s 
shutter  of  the  laser  ablation  of  a  non-energetic 
material  L-glutamine  and  an  energetic  material 
RDX. The first frame after the laser pulse 0 s 
shows the laser-induced plasma which is typically 
more luminescent for non-energetic materials. 
Because  of  the  decrease  in  continuum  emission 
the laser-induced shock wave is visible in the first 
the  RDX  video.  The 
Fig.  5.  Schlieren  images  of  laser-shocked  a  Lglutamine and b RDX. 
frame  83  s  shows  the  roughly  hemi-spherical 
propagation of the shock wave which is faster for 
the  RDX.  The  high-resolution  video  also  shows 
the  ejection  of  material  from  the  target  surface 
resulting  from  the  impact  of  the  internal  shock 
wave. By 500 s the light emission was gone for 
both  materials  and  the  heat-affected  zone  in  the 
background  air  caused  by  the  plasma  formation 
was  clearly  visible  for  both  samples  the  RDX 
produces a significantly larger zone. At later times 
greater than 1 ms the pull of the exhaust to the 
left of the images on the heated air and unreacted 
particles  was  observed  for  the  L-glutamine.  By 
15 ms  RDX  particles  ejected  from  the  sample 
surface  started  deflagrating  as  they  reached  the 
heated  air  above  the  sample  surface  resulting  in 
additional  light  emission  and  rapid  vertical  and 
horizontal expansion of the heated area. 
The  position-time  plot  R-t  or  timeline  for 
the  plasma  plume  position  density  gradient 
position  and  shock  front  positions  for  the  nonenergetic  L-glutamine  is  shown  in  figure  6  top. 
The  main  external  shock  wave  was  not  observed 
until about 10 mm above the target surface due to 
the  strong  plasma  emission.  After  about  60  s  a 
second shock front was observed a third appeared 
with each successive frame approaching the speed 
of sound in air at 343 ms the laser-induced shock 
wave  had  not  yet  decayed  into  a  sound  wave  by 
the final camera frame for any of the samples. 
Typically expansion velocities are determined 
by the derivative of the position-time graph where 
the data is fit to a model based on classical point 
blast  theory.  Most  papers  that  measure  the  laserinduced  shock  wave  apply  the  Sedov-Taylor 
cid1844cid2019cid4672cid2940cid3006cid3096cid3116cid4673cid2869cid2873cid1872cid2870cid2873 
where   with  an  approximate  value  of  1  is  a 
dimensionless  quantity  depending  on  the  gasdynamical state of the air 0 is the mass density of 
the undisturbed air and t is the time of propagation 
assuming the laser pulse duration  t and the laser 
spot  diameter    R.  Equation  10  is  only  valid 
when  the  mass  of  the  energy  source  is  negligible 
compared to the mass of the surrounding air that is 
swept up by the expanding shock i.e. not valid at 
very  early  times  and  when  the  pressure  driving 
the  shock  front  is  much  larger  than  the  pressure 
ahead of it cid1844cid4666cid1831cid2025cid2868cid4667cid2869cid2871 a condition not met 
after  a  certain  distance.  Under 
experimental  conditions  non-energetic  materials 
give an exponent of 0.9-1.0 instead of 0.4 while 
energetic materials result in an exponent of 0.8. 
At  later  times  the  distance  of  the  external 
shock wave from the target R can be described by 
a drag model26 which is given by 
 cid1844cid1844cid2868cid34271cid1857cid2879cid3081cid3047cid3431 
where  R0  is  the  stopping  distance  of  the  shock 
wave  and    is  the  slowing  coefficient  resulting 
from  resistance  caused  by  collisions  with  the 
background  gas.  Eventually 
dissipated  as  a  result  of  this  dragresistive  force. 
While this model fits reasonably well to the nonenergetic samples the fit to the energetic samples 
is extremely poor. The drag model under-predicts 
the shock velocity for the energetic materials at the 
times  less  than  50  s  further  indication  that 
additional  energy  is  put  into  the  plasma  by  the 
exothermic reactions. 
the  shock  data  for 
materials fit well to the Dewey equation27 which 
was originally used to fit the shock position versus 
Fig. 6. Shock timelines for L-glutamine top and RDX 
after approximately 70 s. The region of heated air 
above  the  plasma  plume  was  about  three  times 
larger in height than for the blank tape substrate. 
The  shock  timeline  for  an  energetic  sample 
bottom of figure 6 RDX looked quite different. 
The  laser-induced  plasma  was  significantly  less 
luminous  and  all  visible  emission  was  gone  after 
85  s.  The  heat-affected  zone  above  the  laserinduced plasma was extremely large compared to 
the  blank  and  L-glutamine.  The  second  and  third 
shock  fronts  appeared  much  earlier  at  35 s  and 
fourth and fifth shock fronts appeared after 60 s. 
Unfortunately  with  this  experiment  it  was  not 
possible  to  definitely  determine  the  origin  of  the 
additional shock fronts however their presence is 
likely  indicative  of  the  extra  energy  released 
during  the  laser  ablation  of  an  energetic  material 
and  the  subsequent  exothermic  reactions  in  the 
strengthened  internal  shock  wave  would  undergo 
more  internal  reflections  and  generate  stronger 
refractive  shock  fronts.  The  external  shock  wave 
velocity was also faster for the energetic material. 
Although the velocity of the shock wave decreases 
time  for  a  large-scale  TNT  detonation  the  fit 
resulted  in  large  negative  expansion  distances  at 
time zero for the non-energetic materials. Since no 
model  could  be  found  to  fit  both  energetic  and 
non-energetic  materials  the  data  for  the  shock 
velocity as a function of time was fit to a 5th order 
polynomial  which  was  chosen  as  a  compromise 
between the precision of the measurement and the 
quality  of  the  fit.  The  characteristic  air  shock 
velocity  for  each  sample  was  defined  as  the  yintercept. The actual velocity of the shock wave at 
very early times nanosecond timescale is on the 
order of kms when it is being accelerated by the 
supersonic expansion of the plasma plume. The yintercept does not reflect the velocity at time zero 
therefore but at the point in time when the shock 
front  expands  freely  into  the  ambient  air  without 
subsequent chemical reactions.  
The average characteristic air shock velocities 
for  each  of  the  samples  were  determined  the 
results  are  shown  in  figure  7.  The  error  bars 
represent 95 confidence intervals and reflect the 
shot-to-shot  variations  common  with  the  laser 
ablation  of  powdered  materials428  and 
recorded  for  each  non-energetic  sample  20-40 
laser shots were recorded for each of the energetic 
samples.  The  lowest  air  shock  velocities  were 
obtained  for  the  inert  materials  including  the 
limited  number  of 
blank substrate carbon samples L-glutamine and 
It  has  previously  been  observed  that  the 
repulsive  force  from  a  hard  sample  increases  the 
shock wave velocity while softer samples absorb 
the  ablated  atoms 
subsequently  decreasing  the  speed  of  the  shock 
wave.29  However  with  high  laser  fluences  the 
recoil  force  exerted  on 
expanding  vapor  is  minimized  and  the  relative 
hardness  of  the  material  is  less  important.30  A 
comparison  of  the  measured  air  shock  velocities 
for  the  graphite  samples  graphite  GNP  NG  to 
the  diamond  shock  velocity  shows  that  although 
the  increased  hardness  of  diamond  does  increase 
the  shock  velocity  the  addition  of  energy  to  the 
plasma through chemical reactions produces much 
more  significant  increases  in  shock  velocity. 
Nanoparticles  such  as  GNP  have  a  faster  rate  of 
energy  release  than  larger  micron-size  particles 
such as the graphite and NG31 resulting in a higher 
cid1834cid3030cid28685644  kJmol  is  more  than  twice  that  of 
melamine33 cid1834cid3030cid28682455 kJmol and L-glutamine34 
cid1834cid3030cid28682572 kJmol the sugar sample produced a 
The standard heat of combustion of sucrose32 
higher shock velocity than either the melamine or 
L-glutamine. Both the Epsom salt and AN which 
undergo  exothermic  reactions  in  air  upon  laser 
excitation  produced  shock  velocities  exceeding 
those of the inert materials. 
Fig. 7.  Characteristic laser-induced shock velocities for non-energetic 610 ms and energetic 
650 ms materials. Error bars represent 95 confidence intervals. 
While the low explosives black powder smokeless 
gun  powder  also  produced  larger  shock  velocities 
the  high  explosives 
produced  the  largest  air  shock  velocities  of  all  the 
materials investigated. DNAN which has the lowest 
detonation  velocity  of  the  high  explosives  studied 
here  produced  the  lowest  laser-induced  shock 
velocity  of  the  high  explosive  samples.  CL-20  the 
most  powerful  conventional  military  explosive 
produced  the  highest  shock  velocity.  These  results 
demonstrate that the laser-induced shock waves can 
be used to discriminate between energetic and nonenergetic materials.  
plasmas  are  very  high  temperature  high  pressure 
environments subjected to a shock wave resulting in 
the rapid decomposition of the explosive into atomic 
constituents  and  subsequent  exothermic  formation 
of  gaseous  products.    Understanding  the  chemistry 
that  occurs  in  the  reaction  front  of  an  explosive 
detonation  is  extremely  difficult  due  to  the  short 
timescale and violent release of energy in the form 
of heat sound light and blast.  In addition full-scale 
detonation testing is quite expensive.  The ability to 
study  the  chemical  reactions  of  explosives  in  a 
small-scale  laboratory  environment  that  does  not 
require  extensive  safety  precautions  would  greatly 
benefit  the  development  of  improved  explosive 
formulations.  The  use  of  optical 
spectroscopy  to  study  the  chemical  reactions  of 
energetic  materials  in  laser-induced  plasmas  is 
extremely  promising.    By  monitoring  the  emission 
intensity  of  different  reactant  species  as  a  function 
the  hightemperature chemistry of formulations like metallic 
nanoparticles  and  molecular  explosives  can  be 
achieved  eventually  enabling  the  development  of 
explosive formulations with higher explosive power 
and fewer harmful byproducts.   
time  a  better  understanding  of 
Although  previous  laser-induced  shock  studies 
on  metal  targets  found  no  evidence  for  chemical 
reactions  behind  the  shock  front1235  our  results 
indicate  that  for  non-metal  samples  that  undergo 
exothermic reactions upon decomposition chemical 
reactions in the vapor plume behind the shock front 
affect the shock front velocity. Clear differences in 
the  visible  emission  shock  structure  and  heat
and 
affected zones were observed between the inert and 
energetic  materials.  The  Sedov-Taylor  model  was 
not  applicable  for  any  of  the  samples  studied  here 
because  of  the  distance  from  the  target  and  the 
chemical  reactions  in  the  plasma.  While  the  drag 
model worked well for inert materials the Dewey fit 
worked  best  for  the  energetic  materials.  No  single 
model could be found to fit both energetic and nonenergetic  materials.  Based  on  the  initial  promising 
results  that  demonstrate  a  correlation  between  the 
performance  a  new  laboratory-scale  method  for 
predicting detonation velocities and pressures using 
milligram  quantities  of  material  is  currently  being 
developed in our laboratory. 
Implications of kinetic data from ultrafast laser shock experiments  
S. D. McGrane K. E. Brown N. C. Dang1 and D. S. Moore 
Shock and Detonation Physics Group Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM USA 87544 
1. US Army Research Laboratory Aberdeen MD USA 21005  
Abstract.  We  examine  data  on  chemical  reactivity  occurring  in  300  ps  after  shock 
loading  to  19  and  17  GPa  for  the  liquids  nitromethane  and  acrylonitrile  within  the 
purview of an effective Arrhenius kinetic model. Our primary objective is to determine 
whether the picosecond time scale data is consistent with nanosecond and microsecond 
time  scale  data  from  the  literature.  A  single  Arrhenius  rate  could  be  fit  to  all  available 
data  in  acrylonitrile  ranging  from  microseconds  to  picoseconds.  The  Arrhenius  model 
explains  our  observation  of  a  measurement-time  dependent  transition  or  reaction  cusp 
from the reactant to product Hugoniot in shocked acrylonitrile. In contrast available data 
including reaction in 300 ps at 19 GPa on chemical induction times in nitromethane 
could not be fit to a single Arrhenius rate. 
reaction  rates  in  explosives  is  a  fundamental  step 
initiation  and  performance 
properties.  In  this  paper  we  consider  Arrhenius 
experiments1-6  that  measured  chemical  induction 
times  of  reactions  happening  at  times    300  ps 
observed  in  recent  ultrafast  laser  experiments.7  8 
The  quantification  of  the  reaction  times  and  the 
shock  temperature  estimation  are  treated  crudely 
but this level of detail is sufficient to support our 
principle conclusions. 
The  simplest  kinetic  model  assumes  that  the 
explosive initiation can be roughly described by a 
single  effective  thermally  activated  reaction  rate 
such as given by equation 1.  
In equation 1  is the fraction of reacted material 
A  is  a  frequency  factor  in  s-1  Ea  is  an  activation 
energy in units of K T is the temperature in K and 
k is a first order reaction rate. While this treatment 
of a single reaction step is simplistic there may be 
a rate-limiting step early in the chain of reactions 
that  would  make  this  model  useful.  For  most 
materials  there  is  not  enough  data  to  justify  and 
constrain  more  complex  chemically 
models.  In  nitromethane  more  complex  ignition 
and growth calculations have been performed.9 10 
Shocked  nitromethane  is  perhaps  the  most 
thoroughly  examined  material 
chemical  kinetics.  Streak  camera  images3  4  6 
interferometry2 4 5 11 pyrometry2 5 and embedded 
gauge measurements12 have all been performed in 
nitromethane  to  observe  shock  induced  chemical 
reaction.  The  particular  range  of  initial  shock 
pressures between 7-11 GPa allows observation of 
shock heating which leads to runaway self heating 
Qdetonation5.15  kJg13  thermal  explosion  and  
superdetonation at velocities  10 kms occurring 
in  the  precompressed  material  until  the  reactive 
wave  reaches  the  shock  front  and  settles  into  the 
steady detonation with a velocity of 6.3 kms.3 At 
pressures above 11 GPa these processes must still 
reaction thresholds closer to 5 GPa at observation 
times  of  10  ns.1  6  Figure  2  illustrates  how  the 
cusp  in  the  Hugoniot  induced  by  the  reaction 
occurs  at  different  velocities  with  differences  in 
observation time. This is expected since different 
shock  stress  is  required  to  raise  the  temperature 
sufficiently to  increase the reaction rate into the 
time  of  observation.  This  can  be 
quantitatively  examined  with 
equation 1 as detailed below.  
Fig.  2.  Shock  velocity  versus  particle  velocity  in 
interferometrically  in  300  ps.8  The  black  line  is 
the universal liquid Hugoniot. The blue points are 
explosively  driven  data.6  The  dashed  lines  are 
drawn in as guides to the eye extrapolating to the 
temperature  dependent  heat  capacity 
In order to calculate rates with equation 1 as a 
function  of  shock  stress  the  shock  temperature 
must be known. Since we will use equation 1 well 
beyond  the  range  of  measured  temperatures  we 
follow the unreacted equation of state of Winey et 
al.15  for  nitromethane  and  develop  an  analogous 
model  for  estimating  initial  shock  temperature  in 
acrylonitrile. The unreacted Hugoniot is a fit to the 
data of the form of the universal liquid Hugoniot.16 
nitromethane  is  from  ref15.  The  shock  energy  is 
taken  to  be  EPP0V-V0217  where  V  and  V0 
are the shocked and initial volumes P is the shock 
input  pressure  and  P0  is  negligible.  We  estimate 
our experimental P in the regime of strong reaction 
in  300  ps  for  nitromethane  as  the  initial  shock 
along  the  unreacted  universal  liquid  Hugoniot  in 
Fig. 1 at up2.7 kms  us6.09 kms and P  19 
GPa. Within our shot to shot laser fluctuations this 
agrees  with  pressure  derived  by 
free  surface  velocity  of  our 
aluminum    drive  layer  with  the  universal  liquid 
occur but become faster. Below 7 GPa reactions 
occur  too  slowly  to  easily  observe  with  typical 
Shocked  acrylonitrile  has  also  been  studied  in 
regards  to  its  chemical  reactivity.  Explosively 
driven6 gas gun1 and ultrafast laser experiments8 
have  all  been  performed  with  various  diagnostics 
of mechanical and optical indications of reaction. 
Nitromethane  has  recently  been  observed  to 
react under laser shock conditions 300 ps at 19 
GPa  producing  an  increase  in  volume  similar  to 
the  volume  change  expected 
nitromethane.7 This is shown in comparison to the 
JWL14 product isentrope in Figure 1. The data is in 
even  better  agreement  with  the  product  locus 
predicted by Menikoff and Shaw.7 10 The transient 
absorption  of  chemical  products  is  also  observed 
in the laser shock experiments at 19 GPa.7 Clearly 
a  significant  amount  of  chemical  reaction  is 
occurring at times scales 300 ps. 
Fig.  1.  Shock  velocity  versus  particle  velocity  in 
interferometrically in 300 ps. The black line is a 
fit to the unreactive data in the form of a universal 
liquid  Hugoniot  but  optimized  for  nitromethane. 
The blue dotted line is the JWL product isentrope. 
The green dashed line is the product locus from10 . 
Acrylonitrile shocked above 12 GPa shows a 
significant volume decreasing reaction as well as 
an increased product transient absorption in 300 
ps.8  This  contrasts  with  previous  explosively 
driven and gas gun driven shocks that observed
numerical integration E is divided into 100 steps 
which  each  cause  a  rise  in  temperature  and 
concomitant increase in heat capacity. These steps 
are  integrated  from  the  initial  temperature  of  300 
K to the final temperature. For nitromethane T is 
almost  a  linear  function  of  P  in  the  range  of 
interest with T  299 K  90 KGPa as shown in 
Fig. 3. This fit was used in the modeling. 
Fig. 3. Calculated single shock temperature versus 
pressure in nitromethane along with a linear fit. 
induction  time  for  thermal  explosions  given  by 
where  Q  is  equated  with  the  heat  release  from 
detonation. Figure 4 illustrates that the loglog plot 
is not expected to be linear and we will hereafter 
use a log timelinear pressure scale since pressure 
changes by less than an order of magnitude. 
We  now  consider  whether 
observed by ultrafast laser shock experiments with 
evidence of reaction at 300 ps at pressures of 19 
GPa can be fit with the same model. The fit to the 
data excluding this point is shown along with 90 
confidence  bands  as  grey  in  Fig.  5.  This  fit 
provides Ea14700 K and A1010.2 s-1. Forcing the 
fit  to  accommodate  the  point  at  300  ps  19  GPa 
provides  the  results  shown  in  white Ea21800  K 
and  A1012.9  s-1.  In  this  case  forcing  the  fit  to 
the  high  pressure  data  significantly 
degraded the fit to the data below 12 GPa. 
Induction time fit to single step model
Fig. 4. Log10 of the induction time in the form of 
equation  2  was  fit  to  literature2-4  11  experimental 
data and presented on a loglog plot.  
Data for induction times of nitromethane have 
from  a  number  of  different 
experiments.2-4  11  Some  of  the  scatter  in  the 
induction  times  originates  in  the  difficulty  with 
equating an induction time from a streak record to 
an  induction  time  observed  interferometrically 
with  pyrometry  or  with  embedded  gauges. 
Typically these data are presented as a Pop plot of 
distance.18 The data along with a fit to induction 
time is shown in Figure 4 on a loglog plot. The fit 
is calculated from equation 1 using the predicted 
Fig.  5.  Fits  to  experimental  induction  times  as  a 
function  of  shock  pressure  excluding  grey  and 
forced  to  include  white  the  point  at  300  ps  19 
GPa along with 90 confidence bands. 
The  fact  that  a  large  volume  change  is 
apparent in Figure 1 suggests that the reaction seen 
in 300 ps is affecting a significant proportion of 
the  nitromethane.  To 
nitromethane that is predicted to be reacted within 
300 ps we numerically integrated the evolution of 
reactant  concentration  and 
equation  1  along  with  Qdetonation  and  the  specific 
heat capacity. We are integrating chemical reaction 
kinetics  without  any  hydrodynamics  or  thermal 
transport.  Figure 6 shows the results for an initial 
shock  at  22  GPa2250  K  using  the  activation 
energy  and  frequency  factor  fit  parameters  from 
Fig.  5.  Using  Ea14700  K  and  A1010.2  s-1 
produces  less  than  1  reaction  within  300  ps  at 
temperatures and pressures that are higher than the 
expected  upper  bounds  from  the  ultrafast  laser 
shock  experiments.  Using  Ea21800  K  and 
A1012.9  s-1  predicts  35  reaction  which  is 
consistent with the ultrafast laser results. However 
the high activation energy and frequency factor do 
not  fit  the  low  pressure  data  particularly  well.  It 
seems as if the simple model given by equation 1 
is  not  reproducing  the  experimental  results  for 
nitromethane  initiation.  This  could  be  due  to  the 
neglect  of  activation  volume20  pressure  and 
temperature  dependence  of  the  activation  energy 
and  frequency  factor  or  a  change  in  reaction 
mechanism  with  increasing  shock  stress.  More 
complex reaction kinetics are necessary to fit data 
in  the  7-11  GPa  range  along  with  detonation 
propagation  data.10  We  include  calculations  using 
the model of Menikoff and Shaw10 as green dotted 
in  Fig.  6.  Approximately  5  reaction 
progress  would  be  expected  in  300  ps  which  is 
still not enough to explain the effect shown in Fig. 
1.  It  seems  that  multiple  reactions  either  in 
parallel  or  in  series  are  occurring  over  the  range 
shock pressures 7-21 GPa in nitromethane. 
We  now  turn  our  consideration  to  shocked 
calculations  as  performed  for  nitromethane.  The 
temperature  dependent  specific  heat  capacity  was 
fit to experimental data in the range 220-300 K21 in 
the  form  of  a  constant  plus  a  single  Einstein 
oscillator15 with a high temperature limit matching 
the Dulong-Petit value of 3.29 Jg K. 
!1.37!0.37!exp !!!!! 1.62! 4 
The fit shown in Fig. 7 determined a1.927 JgK 
and  b2213.4  K.  Using  the  universal  liquid 
Hugoniot16 given in equation 4 
along  with  the  sound  speed  c01.19  kms  in 
acrylonitrile22 we can determine the single shock 
temperature as a function of pressure as shown in 
Fig. 8. Again the temperature is almost linear with 
the shock pressure in our range of interest and we 
use  the  fit  relation  T    275  K    104.8  KGPa 
Fig.  6.  Numerical  integration  of  the  evolution  of 
reactant  concentration  and  temperature  predicted 
by equation 1 for an initial shock to 2250 K. The 
blue solid line is for Ea14700 K and A1010.2 s-1 
and  the  red  dashed  line  is  for  Ea21800  K  and 
A1012.9 s-1. The green dotted line is a calculation 
of  the  second  order  rate  from  reference10  with  a 
maximum rate cutoff at T3000 K and Ea15000 
K and A1011.18 s-1. 
Fig.  7.  Specific  heat  capacity  model  used  for 
Here we predict 10 reaction for Ea10900 K and 
A1010.9 s-1 and 35 reaction for Ea13200 K and 
A1011.9  s-1.  The  acrylonitrile  Hugoniot  shown  in 
red  in  Figure  2  does  not  reach  the  extrapolated 
fully reacted product curve so the partial reaction 
prediction shown in Fig. 10 is consistent with the 
empirically  described  by  equation  1  are  adequate 
to  interpret  the  data.  The  natural  interpretation  of 
this  mechanism  would  be  the  initial  creation  of 
radicals  in  the  first  step  followed  by  a  radical 
polymerization chain reaction. The initial step has 
been  observed  near  ambient  temperature  and 
pressure conditions to have an activation energy of 
Ea15900  K.23  Since  the  reaction  has  a  volume 
reduction  that  may  lead  to  pressure  acceleration 
the observed Ea13200 K at pressures of 5-20 GPa 
is reasonable although certainly not conclusive. 
Fig. 8. Single shock temperature versus pressure in 
acrylonitrile along with a linear fit. 
We  can  now  use  literature  data  on  shocked 
acrylonitrile  reaction  times1  6  8  to  determine 
activation  energies  and  frequency  factors.  These 
data include reflectivity electrical and embedded 
gauge  measurements  which  once  again  are  not 
necessarily  directly  comparable  but  are  the  best 
information  available.  In  particular  we  use  the 
embedded  gauge  first  reaction  times1  in  the  fit. 
Although a faster second reaction follows the first 
the  initial  reaction  should  be  responsible  for  the 
experiments. Note that the reaction of acrylonitrile 
is highly exothermic with Q1.364 kJg.23 The fit 
excluding the ultrafast laser point is shown in grey 
providing  Ea10900  K  and  A1010.9  s-1.  The  fit 
with the point at 300 ps 17 GPa is shown in white 
providing  Ea13200  K  and  A1011.9  s-1.  For 
acrylonitrile  including  the  high  pressure  point  at 
17  GPa  does  not  substantially  diminish  the  fit  to 
the data from 5-9 GPa. 
Fig.  9.  Fits  to  experimental  induction  times  as  a 
function  of  shock  pressure  excluding  grey  and 
forced  to  fit  white  the  point  at  300  ps  19  GPa 
along with 90 confidence bands. 
Numerical  simulation  of  the  reaction  kinetics  is 
shown in Figure 10 for a shock at 17 GPa 2000 K. 
Fig. 10. Numerical integration of the evolution of 
reactant  concentration  and  temperature  predicted 
by equation 1 for an initial shock to 2250 K. The 
blue solid line is for Ea10900 K and A1010.9 s-1 
and  the  red  dashed  line  is  for  Ea13200  K  and 
These  considerations  of  acrylonitrile  now 
allow  us  to  understand  the  time  dependent  nature 
of the reaction cusp observed in Fig. 2. Both of the 
Hugoniots  plotted  in  Fig.  2  are  slices  from  a 
continuous surface as notionally illustrated in Fig. 
11.  The  cusp  position  depends  not  only  on  the 
temperature  achieved  the  activation  energy  and 
frequency factor but also the observation time of 
the shock diagnostics. 
Fig.  11.  Calculation  of  cusptransition  as  a 
function  of  particle  and  shock  velocity  for 
different  observation 
activated volume decreasing reaction. 
Simple  considerations  of  Arrhenius  kinetics 
dependence  of  the  Hugoniot  cusp  in  shocked 
acrylonitrile.  Shocked  reaction  data  from  0.3  to 
1000 ns induction times could all be reasonably fit 
to  a  single  effective  Arrhenius  rate.  In  contrast 
nitromethane  reactions  at  0.3  ns  and  shocked 
induction time data in the 100-3500 ns range could 
not be fit with a single reaction rate. Ultrafast kinetics subsequent to shock in an unreacted oxygen balanced mixture of 
nitromethane and hydrogen peroxide 
Michael R. Armstrong Joseph M. Zaug Christian D. Grant Jonathan C. Crowhurst and Sorin Bastea 
Chemical Sciences Division Physical and Life Sciences 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94550 
Abstract.  We  apply  ultrafast  optical  interferometry  to  measure  the  Hugoniot  of  an 
oxygen-balanced mixture of nitromethane and hydrogen peroxide NMHP and compare 
with  Hugoniot  data  for  pure  nitromethane  NM  and  a  90  hydrogen  peroxidewater 
mixture  HP  as  well  as  theoretical  predictions.  Unlike  the  Hugoniots  of  both  HP  and 
NM in the NMHP mixture we observe shock speed deviations to values lower than the 
unreacted Hugoniot. Although the trend should reverse for high enough piston speeds the 
initial  behavior  is  unexpected.  Possible  explanations  range  from  mixing  effects  to  a 
complex  index  of  refraction  in  the  reacted  solution.  If  this  is  indeed  a  signature  of 
chemical initiation it would suggest that the process may not be kinetically limited on a 
100 ps time scale between the initiation threshold and the von Neumann pressure. 
The  propagation  of  shockwaves  in  energetic 
liquids  is  accompanied  by  complex  physical  and 
chemical phenomena that remain of much interest 
both  experimentally  and  theoretically13  due  to 
their  fundamental  and  practical  relevance.  The 
transition from the shocked but unreacted state to 
one that has undergone exothermic or endothermic 
chemistry  is  yet  to  be  fully  understood.  Where 
determines  important  characteristics  such  as  the 
failure  diameter  and  shock  front  curvature45. 
Understanding the dynamic response of a shocked 
liquid prior to chemical bond breaking is a major 
component  of  modeling  efforts  aimed  to  better 
reactivity  under  high  pressure  and 
prototypical  energetic  material  and  as  a  result  its 
conditions.  Nitromethane 
characterized  using  shock  experiments67  more 
recently  molecular  dynamics  MD  simulations 
have  also  been  reported89.  A  comprehensive 
understanding of the shock physics and chemistry 
of  most  other  energetic  liquids  and  particularly 
liquid  mixtures  is  however  far  less  developed. 
Recently  the  shock  Hugoniots  of  nonideal  and 
ideal fluid mixtures were experimentally measured 
and  it  was  suggested  that  hydrogen  bonding 
networks  affect  nonideal  mixture 
nonideal  mixture  shock  velocities  shifted  away 
predictions10.  Since  most  equation  of  state 
developments67 and simulations89 rely heavily on 
high pressure experimental data it is important to 
understand how other fluids behave under similar 
shock  conditions  and 
to  what  extent  such 
indicators  of  non-universal 
Here  we  report  new  ultrafast  shockwave 
measurements  on  an  oxygen  balanced  mixture  of 
nitromethane  and  hydrogen  peroxide  NMHP 
and  compare  the  results  with  unreacted  shock 
Hugoniot data for a 90 hydrogen peroxidewater 
representative  energetic 
liquids411  with  zero  and  positive  oxygen balance 
respectively.  We  compare  the  NMHP  data  with 
liquid  Hugoniot  proposed  by 
Woolfolk  et  al.12  equation  of  state  predictions 
interactions13  and 
unreacted nitromethane NM Hugoniot data from 
gas  gun  measurements  and  our  own  ultrafast 
measurements. We note generally that the ULH is 
only  an  empirical  relation  -  we  present  an 
alternative  empirical  form  that  yields  the  correct 
behavior  both  at  upc0    0  and  asymptotically  as 
upc0  .  For  the  NMHP mixture  we observe a 
likely reduction in volume above a piston velocity 
threshold  of  1.7  km  s-1  and  discuss  possible 
explanations of this effect. 
Experimental details 
The  NMHP  sample  was  a  mixture  of  90 
hydrogen  peroxide  in  water  and  nitromethane 
with  48.2  HP51.8  NM  weight  fractions.  All 
surfaces  in  the  sample  cell  were  passivated  by 
exposure to 90 HP for more than 24 hours prior 
to  loading  the  sample.  After  this  passivation 
decomposition formed indicating that the HPNM 
concentration.  NM  and  HP  are  miscible  at  this 
concentration.14 The experimental apparatus is the 
same  as  used  in  previous  work11516    shown 
schematically in Figs. 1 and 2. A chirped 350 ps 
duration  25  nm  full  width  at  half  maximum 
FWHM  spectral  width  800  nm  wavelength 
pump pulse is focused by a 2 cm focal length lens 
to  25  micron  FWHM  intensity  and  drives  a 
shock wave through a 1 micron thick Al ablator 
on  a  glass  cover  slip  into  the  sample  which  is 
liquid  in  all  cases.  Meanwhile  a  pair  of  chirped 
probe  pulses  incident  from  the  opposite  side 
measure a time-dependent phase shift effectively 
an  ultrafast  analog  to  the  Velocity  Interferometry 
System for Any Reflector VISAR17 system used 
in  longer  time  scale  experiments  which  via 
methods  described  previously115  give  the  shock 
speed the piston speed ie. the speed of Alsample 
interface and the index of refraction between the 
shock front and the piston interface. On the probe 
side the piston interface is imaged onto the slit of 
imaging  spectrometer  with  a  0.28  NA 
microscope objective with 10x total magnification 
between  the  sample  and  the  detector  and  the 
ultimate  spatial  resolution 
knowledge  of  the  particle  speed  just  behind  the 
shock front and the shockwave speed the pressure 
and  density  of  the  shockwave  compressed  state 
the  Rankine-Hugoniot 
equations  which  connect  the  initial  and  final 
thermodynamic  states  of 
the  material  using 
conservation  of  mass  and  momentum.  We  note 
that our experiment measures the piston speed not 
the  particle  speed  just  behind  shock  front  but  it 
has been shown in previous work1 that assuming 
the  particle  speed  is  the  same  as  the  measured 
piston speed the measured shockwave speed will 
correspond  to  the  known  Hugoniot  to  better  than 
2  accuracy.116  Here  we  measure  the  Hugoniot 
of a previously uncharacterized sample HPNM 
and  assume  an  accuracy  of  better  than  2 in  the 
Figure 1 The experimental layout for shock loading the NMHP mixture. A 350 ps duration pump 
pulse drives the shock wave. Meanwhile two identical but 10 ps time delayed probe pulses incident 
from the opposite side obtain velocimetry data from the shock breakout region. PBS stands for 
polarizing beam splitter and 4 is a quarter waveplate set to rotate the polarization 90 degrees in 
measurement for the unreacted species. Generally 
as discussed below the standard deviation of our 
data is less than 2. 
Figure 2 A close-up of a cross-section of the 
shock  breakout  profile.  Data  were  obtained  from 
the both the center of the breakout profile and offcenter. 
For  quantitative  comparisons  between  our 
data and Hugoniots from theory or fits to previous 
data  we  evaluate  a  mean  pairwise  difference 
 cid1839cid1842cid1830 cid3048cid3294cid3009cid4666cid3048cid3291cid46671 
where  H  a  continuous 
theoretical Hugoniot or a fit to previous data us is 
the  measured  shockwave  speed  up 
corresponding  measured  piston  speed  and  the 
average is taken over measured data points. Mean 
pairwise  differences  larger  than  the  standard 
deviation of the data are statistically significant. 
This technique obtains a full spatial profile1516 
of the shock breakout see Fig. 2 where the aspect 
ratio of the experiment is sufficient to assume near 
1D  compression  over  the  central  portion  of  the 
profile1618.  Since  the  piston  speed  varies  with 
spatial  position  it  is  possible  analogous  to 
previous  work  with  UDE19  to  obtain  several 
points  along  the  Hugoniot  simultaneously  with  a 
single  shot  rather  than  only  one  point  per  shot 
typically at the center of the spatial profile as in 
most  previous  work11620.  Here  for  NMHP  we 
measure shock parameters at several points along 
the spatial profile from each of multiple shots at a 
given pump energy for three pump energies. This 
increases  the  amount  of  data  which  may  be 
obtained  per  shot  and  allows  averaging  of 
Hugoniot points which reduces noise and enables 
statistical  characterization  of  the  measurement. 
This  also  enables  direct  confirmation  of  the 
assumption  of  1D  compression  where  shock 
parameters  should  only  depend  on  the  local 
intensity  of  the  pump21  not  explicitly  the  pump 
energy  when the 1D approximation is valid the 
shock  and  piston  speeds  are  correlated  regardless 
of the total pump energy. 
To  calculate  the  universal  liquid  Hugoniot12 
for a comparison to the measured Hugoniot data 
the  sound  speed  was  measured  in  NMHP  under 
ambient conditions. The adiabatic speed of sound 
of the liquid mixture at ambient pressure and 294 
K  was  measured  using  the  impulsive  stimulated 
light  scattering  ISLS  technique22  where  here 
instead  of  containing  the  sample  in  a  diamond 
anvil cell a drop of the liquid sample was placed 
between  two  borosilicate  microscope  coverslips 
separated by a 120 m thick teflon gasket. 
Results and discussion 
speed  pairs  were  determined 
For the NMHP mixture we measured shock 
and piston speeds at three different pulse energies 
41  50  and  80  J.  For  each  pump  energy  we 
obtained between forty and fifty shots. Shock and 
approximately 10 positions near the spatial center 
of the pump pulse for all shots and all shots of a 
given energy and position were averaged to obtain 
the us-up data shown in Fig. 3. Error bars are plus 
or minus one standard deviation of the data from 
the  mean  for  data  at  a  given  pump  energy  and 
spatial position. For pure NM we obtained center 
of  profile  Hugoniot  data  under  conditions  similar 
to  HP  data  obtained  previously.1  The  MPD 
between our NM data and a linear fit to previously 
measured unreacted NM shock Hugoniot data23 for 
up  1.2 kms ie. where the noise is low is 0.6 
which  is  within  the  standard  deviation  of  the 
previously  measured  NM  data  from  its  linear  fit 
The inset to Fig. 3 shows NMHP data for 50 
J  pump  energy  where  points  along  a  spatial  1D 
cut  through  the  pump  profile  are  labeled  by  the 
corresponding  position  in  CCD  pixels  at  the 
detector.  The  spacing  of  CCD  pixels  scales  to  2 
mpixel at the sample. Consistent with the spatial 
profile of the pump the piston speed in the inset to 
Fig.  3  starts  from  a  minimum  on  one  side  of  the 
spatial profile at pixel -5 reaches a maximum at 
the center of the pump profile near pixel 0 and 
then  decreases  to  another  minimum  on  the  other 
the  profile  at  pixel  5.  A  similar 
progression  is  observed  in  data  at  all  pump 
To calculate the ULH the sound speed in the 
NMHP  mixture  was  measured  under  ambient 
conditions  using  ISLS  as  described 
experimental section. Based on an average of three 
measurements  the  sound  speed  was  1582.0  kms 
-  1.6  ms.  The  acoustic  frequency  for  the 
measurements was 0.94 GHz we did not attempt 
to  measure  acoustic  dispersion  as  a  function  of 
frequency and so cannot be absolutely certain that 
we  measured  the  fully  relaxed  sound  speed.  If  a 
glass-like  hydrogen  bonding  network  persists  in 
this  mixture  then  it  is  conceivable  that  the  sound 
speed  would  be  approximately  4-8  lower  than 
our measured value.22 
For points below 1.7 kms piston speed shock 
speeds  are  larger  than  the  unreacted  universal 
liquid Hugoniot12 by a MPD of 2.1 assuming the 
measured  sound  speed  at  ambient  conditions  of 
1.582 kms and also larger than a thermochemical 
calculation of the mixture Hugoniot by a MPD of 
thermodynamic  modeling13  of 
mixture components using isotropic exponential-6 
interactions  calibrated  to  available  experimental 
data1671324  the  difference  with  the  experiments 
may  possibly  be  due  to  limitations  of  such 
modeling for relatively low temperature mixtures 
particularly due to the use of isotropic short range 
interactions and standard unlike-pair mixing rules 
for a fairly large molecule such as nitromethane. 
Figure  3  Hugoniot  data  for  the  NMHP  mixture 
the  universal  liquid  Hugoniot  and  the  Hugoniot 
calculated  using  thermochemical  techniques.  The 
vertical  dashed  line  is  at  1.7  kms  piston  speed 
which  is  near  the  initiation  threshold  for  HP  and 
NM  see  main  text.  The  inset  shows  the  data 
taken with 50 J pump energy without error bars. 
Each  point  is  labeled  by  CCD  pixel  row  where 
each pixel row corresponds to a spatial position on 
the  sample  along  a  1D  cut  through  the  pump 
profile. Pixel 0 is the center of the profile. A fit to 
data  below  1.7  kms  piston  speed  is  shown  as  a 
in  both  gas  gun25  and 
Generally unreacted shock Hugoniot data for 
concentration  at  90  or  greater  well  match  the 
experiments.  Here  except  for  one  point  at 
approximately 1.6 kms piston speed and 4.5 kms 
shock speed all data below 1.7 kms piston speed 
are  consistent  with  a  single  linear  trend  and 
generally the average piston speed increases with 
remaining  data  vary 
substantially with pump energy. Since 1.7 kms is 
near the initiation thresholds of both NM and HP 
with 1.84 kms23 1.7 kms25 respectively  please 
see  references  23  and  25  for  more  detail 
henceforth we will refer to data below this value as 
the  unreacted  Hugoniot  of  the  NMHP  mixture. 
Further  above  1.7  kms  piston  speed  the  data 
deviate  significantly  below 
unreacted Hugoniot likely due to effects related to 
initiation although the downward trend is puzzling 
given  the  expected  exothermic  reactivity.  Such 
trends have been previously associated with firstorder  phase  transformations  in  shocked  solids26 
and  continuous  shock-induced  dissociation 
fluids  e.g.  molecular  nitrogen27  discontinuous 
dissociation i.e. liquid-liquid phase transition has 
also been suggested for molecular hydrogen28 and 
in  shocked  carbonyl  disulfide 
CS229.  Nominally  exothermic  reactions  within  a 
300 ps time window have been observed in pure 
nitromethane  above  about  2  kms  piston  speed.30 
We should note however that the interpretation of 
our data rests on the assumption that the index of 
refraction behind the shock front is real yet recent 
simulations31  of  shocked  reacting  NM  indicate 
that the reacting sample may develop an imaginary 
index of refraction. 
We  also  note  that  the  observed  deviation 
threshold  varies  with  the  laser  drive  energy  and 
speculate  that  this  variation  is  due  to  deviations 
from  quasi-1D  compression.  Although  the  data 
compression  along  the  unreacted  Hugoniot  the 
the  sample  may  be  sufficiently 
nonlinear above a threshold piston speed for the 
hydrodynamic response to deviate from quasi-1D 
resulting in a variation of threshold hydrodynamic 
behavior  with  compressed  volume  which 
proportional to the pulse energy. Related to this 
Hugoniot  are  least  severe  for  the  highest  pump 
energy where we would expect the least deviation 
from quasi-1D conditions.  
that  deviations  from 
This deviation  occurs within  the 350 ps  time 
window of the experiment in contrast to previous 
ultrafast  HP  data  which  do  not  diverge  from  the 
corresponding  unreacted  Hugoniot  for  any  piston 
speed between the initiation threshold of 1.7 kms 
piston speed25 and the von Neumann pressure for 
the  steady  detonation1.  This  suggests  that  the 
initiation  mechanism  in  NMHP  may  differ  from 
Ultrafast  NMHP  data  NM  data  compiled 
from  gas  gun  experiments23  ultrafast  NM  data 
and  ultrafast  HP  data  from  previous  work1  are 
shown  in  Fig.  4.  The  ultrafast  HP  data  were 
calculated by sorting previously published data1 by 
piston  speed  and  taking  an  average  of  every 
subsequent 5 points in this sorted set. The original 
HP data set had 100 points distributed between 1 
kms  and  2.5  kms  piston  speed.  The  averaged 
dataset  has  20  points  total  with  the  averaged 
points well-centered in the larger set of unaveraged 
points. This procedure reduces the scatter per point 
and  makes  trends  in  the  data  easier  to  see.  The 
ultrafast  NM  data  were  derived  from  the  same 
averaging  procedure  applied  to  center  of  profile 
data  acquired in  the  same  way  as  the  HP  data  of 
ref. 1. Nine averaged points were derived from the 
original ultrafast NM dataset comprising 45 shots. 
the  sample  under  ambient  conditions.  They 
suggested the functional form 
normalized form of Wookfolk et al.12. The plot is 
consistent  with  the  existence  of  a  universal 
liquid  Hugoniot  ULH  as  proposed  by  Woolfolk 
et  al.  which  posits  that  all  liquid  Hugoniot  data 
should  fall  on  the  same  curve  when  plotted  as 
cid1873cid3046cid1855cid2868 vs. cid1873cid3043cid1855cid2868  where cid1855cid2868 is the speed of sound in 
 cid3048cid3294cid3030cid31161cid1853cid2868cid34361cid1857cid2879cid3028cid3117cid3296cid3291cid3278cid3116cid3440cid1853cid2870cid3048cid3291cid3030cid3116                     2 
parameters  for  the  form  of  eq.  1  arecid1853cid28680.37  
cid1853cid28692  and cid1853cid28701.62.  Although  this  relation  is 
for  this  universal  curve  which  has  the  correct 
limiting behavior at low piston speeds and trends 
to  a  linear  dependence  at  high  piston  speeds  as 
observed  in  shock  physics  the  Woolfolk  et  al. 
the most commonly cited at least one other form 
for  the  high  piston  speed  liquid  Hugoniot  was 
proposed  by  Voskoboinikov  et  al.32  without  the 
exponential  term.  The  Woolfolk  et  al.  ULH 
matches  well  the  HP  and  NMHP  data  at  higher 
piston speeds upc01 with significant deviations 
occurring  for  lower  values.  Our  fit  to  the  data  of 
Fig.  3c  using  the  form  of  Eq.1  gives cid1853cid28680.67 
cid1853cid28692.43 and cid1853cid28701.33 such fits are sometimes 
used  when  the  Woolfolk  functional  form  not  the 
actual parameters is assumed to be universal. It 
is worth noting that there is no fundamental basis 
for  the  above functional  form  or  the ULH  idea. 
For example we find that the relation  
cid3048cid3294cid3030cid31161cid3048cid3291cid3030cid3116
cid3296cid3291cid3278cid3116cid2878cid3029cid31162cid1857cid2879cid3029cid3117cid3278cid3116cid3296cid3291cid2872cid2871cid3048cid3291cid3030cid3116 
shown  in  Fig.  4c  as  a  blue  line  which  actually 
HP  NM  and  HPNM  at  1.7  kms  particle  speed 
are  1.51  and  12.0  GPa    1.63  and  8.48  GPa  and 
1.53 and 10.6 GPa respectively. Typical times to 
explode  are  100s  ns    s  in  HP  and  NM  under 
development  may  enable  extending  the  data  to 
higher  piston  speeds  and  longer  time  scales  and 
thus help to elucidate these issues. 
Figure 4 a Unreacted Hugoniot data for the NMHP mixture NM Hugoniot data from previous gas 
gun experiments averaged ultrafast NM data and averaged ultrafast HP Hugoniot data from previous 
work. The vertical dashed line is at 1.7 kms piston speed which is near the initiation threshold for HP 
and NM. b Thermodynamic states corresponding to shock data with initial volumes of 0.79 cm3 for 
NMHP 0.88 cm3 for NM and 0.71 cm3 for HP. Thermochemical calculations give a temperature for 
the NMHP mixture of 920K at a piston speed of 1.7 kms. c The same data as Fig. 4a but in the 
normalized  form  of  Woolfolk  et  al.12  where  the  shock  and  piston  speeds  are  normalized  by  the 
ambient condition sound speed for a given sample. The three fits are the Woolfolk form of the ULH12 
eq. 1 with our fit for the parameters red the Woolfolk ULH using his parameters green and our 
form from the text blue. The blue and red curves very nearly overlap. 
ideal  gas  limit  works  equally  well  with cid1854cid2868
0.591  and cid1854cid28694.68  of  course  the  exponential 
yields the right asymptotic behavior for upc0  
term  can  be  easily  neglected  for  the  piston 
velocities of interest here.  
Although unreacted data for all pump energies 
are  consistent  with  a  single  Hugoniot  for  the 
NMHP  oxygen-balanced  mixture  deviations  of 
the  data  from  the  unreacted  Hugoniot  above  the 
1.7  kms  piston  speed  1  depend  significantly  on 
the  pump  energy  and  2  are  substantially  more 
than  unreacted  data.  No  obvious 
mechanism  explains  this  but  threshold  reactivity 
effects  may  play  a  role  above  1.7  kms  piston 
speed.  The  compression  ratios  and  pressures  for 
In  conclusion  we  have  used  ultrafast  optical 
interferometry  to  measure  the  Hugoniot  of  an 
oxygen  balanced  nitromethanehydrogen  peroxide 
mixture  and  compared  these  data  with  Hugoniot 
data  for  pure  nitromethane  NM  and  a  90 
hydrogen peroxidewater mixture HP as well as 
theoretical predictions. We observe a 2.1 percent 
mean  pairwise  difference  between  the  measured 
shockwave speed at the measured piston speed in 
universal  liquid  Hugoniot  which  is  larger  than 
the average standard deviation of our data 1.4. 
For  NMHP  we  observe  deviations  from  the 
unreacted  Hugoniot  which  may  be  related  to 
mixing effects. We also generally note that the low 
particle  speed  form  of 
Hugoniot is not strongly constrained by empirical 
data    an  alternate  form  which  gives  the  correct 
behavior  in  the  high  particle  speed  limit  fits  the 
data  as  well  as  the  conventional  Woolfolk  form. 
We emphasize that an empirical form such as the 
ULH based on the Wookfolk parameterization or 
otherwise  cannot replace  the  direct  measurement 
We acknowledge useful conversations with L. 
E. Fried C. Tarver D. Dlott and R. Manaa. This 
research was performed under the auspices of the 
U.S.  Department  of  Energy  by  Lawrence 
Livermore  National  Laboratory  under  Contract 
No. DE-AC52-07NA27344 and it was funded by 
Laboratory  Directed  Research  and  Development 
grant  11ERD067  with  S.B. Optical Ranging to Measure the Material Approach Missed By Optical Velocimetry 
Matthew E. Briggs Lawrence Hull Erik Moro Patrick Younk and Daniel Knierim 
Weapons Experimentation Division 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 
Theoretical Design Division 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 
Tektronix Corporation 
Approved for unlimited release LA-UR-14-24971 
Abstract. Optical velocimetry  measures the component of the target velocity along the 
axis of the optical beam. This is an asset allowing for unambiguous interpretation but 
allows  a  laterally  moving  tilted  surface  to  approach  a  probe  undetected.  In  most 
applications it is important to know the position of the target surface and the forgoing 
means that integrating the velocity will in general give an incorrect position. We present 
preliminary results on two approaches to overcome this limitation amplitude modulation 
interferometry in which a change in path length shows up as a change in the phase of the 
modulation  and  frequency  swept  optical  ranging.  Both  of  these  can  be  integrated  with 
existing  velocimetry  probes  for  simultaneous  velocity  and  displacement  measurements. 
We also describe a 3rd approach that has some desirable features relative the first two but 
is not yet tested.  
Velocimetry does not measure the full material 
Briggs  et  al.  and  Dolan  et  al.1-3  showed  in 
2009  that  Photon  Doppler  optical  velocimetry 
PDV  does  not  measure  the  full  approach  of 
material toward the probe even though PDV is a 
displacement interferometer but only measures the 
portion of the motion arising from the component 
of  velocity  along  the  beam.  This  is  an  asset  for 
optical  velocimetry  because 
interpretation  of  a  velocimetry 
measurement.  One  need  not  wonder  whether  the 
signal is arising from the lateral motion of a tilted 
surface  it  always  gives  only  the  portion  of  the 
approach arising from a velocity component along 
the  measurement  beam.  However  this  limits  the 
applicability of velocimetry in situations where the 
distance to the material is needed. Only the normal 
velocity v1 in Fig. 1 and the bore probe in Fig. 2 
material  position  during  the  course  of  a  dynamic 
experiment.  The  cylinder  test  shown  in  Fig.  3  is 
one of many standard tests for which the integrated 
velocimetry will not give the correct constraint on 
material location. The details of how much motion 
is measured and how much is missed are shown in 
will  integrate  to  give  the  correct  change  in 
distance.  The  most  obvious  example  of  missed 
motion  is  the  result  of  the  perpendicular  probe 
measurement  in  Fig.  2  which  gives  a  constant 
speed of 0 despite the approach of material along 
the ramp. The above experiments were a follow-on 
to Goosmans original demonstration of this effect 
in  1986  for  Fabry-Perot  velocimetry4.  Note  that 
even  if  one  uses  multiple  probes  to  resolve  the 
velocity vector the approach of material due to the 
lateral motion of a tilted surface is missed. In our 
demonstration  experiment  shown  in  Fig.  2  the 
perpendicular  probe  reports  a  constant  zero  and 
the  angled  probe  a  constant  vcos45  neither 
notice the approach of the ramp.  
Fig  3.  Shown  is  a  st6andard  test  in  which 
velocimetry  performed  from  the  direction  shown 
will integrate to the wrong material displacement. 
Fig 4.  The approach of material to a velocimetry 
probe  can  be  divided 
components  one  arising  from  the  component  of 
velocity along the beam which is measured and 
the other from the lateral motion of a tilted surface 
One approach to measuring the full motion is to 
create  an  effective  wavelength  large  compared 
to the surface roughness 
Fig 1.  Single beam optical velocimetry will 
give  the  same  result  for  all  four  velocities 
Fig  2.    Integrating  the  velocimetry  from  the 
probes  in  this  Fig.  will  give  the  correct 
distance  to  the  projectile  only  for  the  bore 
probe  which  is  aligned  with  the  velocity 
   For  a  simulation  or  model  of  an  explosively 
driven  system  to  be  complete  it  must  predict  the 
material location. Currently workers must rely on 
assumptions or simulations to supply this missing 
information no experimental technique exists with 
the required spatial and time resolution to track the 
So far in this paper we are pointing out things 
that are widely known. However the implications 
are  not  widely  appreciated  integrating  optical 
velocimetry  measurements 
insufficient to determine the change in distance or 
range  to  a  target.  To  measure  the  full  target 
approach  rate  optically  we  must  create  an 
effective  wavelength  greater  than  the  surface 
roughness or complete the measurement in a time 
small  compared  to  the  movement  of  the  target 
relative to the illuminated spot. 
Performance goals and proposed methods 
Our  desired  spatial  resolution  is  0.1  mm 
because  we  know  that  is  adequate  from  the 
historical  performance  of  electrical  shorting  pins. 
We picked a measurement frequency of 1 MHz to 
give  one  measurement  every  millimeter  for  a 
typical  speed  of  1  mms.  The  time  for  light  to 
travel 0.1 mm is about 0.33 ps. We assume that the 
measurements  are  round-trip  measurements  i.e. 
the beam travels to and from the target on the same 
path which is typical for velocimetry. This means 
that  a  motion  of  0.1  mm  will  result  in  twice  that 
much time elapsed so the time resolution we need 
in  our  measurement  strategy  is  0.67  ps.  We 
describe  several  methods  for  achieving 
performance  and  show  proof  of  performance 
Current  state-of-the-art  oscilloscopes  have  a 
rise  time  of  about  20  ps  too  slow  to  resolve  the 
round trip time to the resolution that we need. We 
propose  instead  to  measure  the  average  arrival 
time of a burst of 100 pulses a 20 noise on a 20 
ps  rise-time  will  give  4  ps  resolution  on  an 
individual  pulse  edge  arrival  time.  That  would 
reduce to 4 ps100 pulses  2 edgespulse  .3 
ps  for  an  average  of  100  pulses  if  the  errors  are 
random. The average is the same as the time at the 
center  of  the  pulse  stream  if  the  velocity  is 
constant  over  the  10  ns  burst  which  will  usually 
hold.  The  next  burst  arrives  at  a  time  T    .3  ps 
later.  As  the  target  location  changes  by  x  T 
reduces by 2xc which we can now resolve with 
twice  the  required  precision  allowing  room  for 
Many  applications  of  optical  velocimetry 
measure the backscattered light from a surface that 
is  not  normal  to  the  beam  as  described  in  the 
examples  in  the  previous  section.  In  order  for  a 
surface that is not normal to the illumination beam 
to  scatter  light  backwards  the  surface  must  be 
rough compared to the wavelength of light. Such a 
surface  is  said  to  be  diffuse  or  non-specular.  If  a 
surface  smooth  compared  to  the  wavelength  of 
light  would  scatter  light  back  into  the  probe  the 
dots in Fig. 5 the approach of the lateral motion 
shown would presumably be measured. However 
we must roughen the surface in order to get nonspecular back scattering the Xs shown in Fig. 5 
causing the phase information to be scrambled by 
random  additions  of  2.  As  a  result 
contribution  to  the  motion  goes  undetected  and 
only  the  beat  frequency  arising  from  the  Doppler 
shift of motion along the beam is detected. 
Fig  5.  The  tilted  surface  shown  is  moving  to  the 
right  causing  material  to  approach  the  probe 
while  the  individual  scatterers  have  no  velocity 
toward  the  probe.  The  approach  of  the  idealized 
tilted smooth surface shown in red dots would be 
measured if back-scattered light could be detected 
from such a smooth surface. However in order to 
scatter  light  from  such  a  tilted  surface  back  into 
the  probe  the  surface  must  be  rough  Xs.  This 
scrambles the phase masking the approach. 
Amplitude Modulation 
In Fig. 8 we show our proof-of-concept setup 
for  a  amplitude  modulation  phase-measurement 
approach. We create an infrared beam at 1550 nm 
with  a  1  GHz  amplitude  modulation  using  an 
acousto-optic  frequency  shifter.  We  split  this  in 
two sending one beam to the target and the other 
we  use  as  the  local  oscillator.  We  detect  the  two 
beams  separately  using  30  kHz15  GHz  bandpass  receivers.  The  optical  frequency  is  not 
detected  and  the  detectors  pass  only  the  1  GHz 
amplitude  modulations.  The  phase  difference 
between  these  two  signals  is  proportional  to  the 
time delay between the signals and the change in 
phase is related simply to the change in position of 
the surface by x    2. The wavelength of 
the  1  GHz  beat  frequency  is  33  cm  so  surface 
roughness is much smaller than the wavelength.  
We pass a block under the beam at a speed of 
about 20 ms and find the expected phase change 
Insert in Fig. 8. Optical velocimetry would have 
measured  a  constant  zero  in  this  situation  as 
measurements  were  made  with 
lasers  and  probes  and  so  are 
measurements.  The  resolution  is  0.1  mm  as 
desired  with  a  systematic  oscillation  at  100  kHz. 
The latter is not intrinsic to the technique and we 
will  attempt  to  eliminate  it  if  we  down-select  to 
this technique among the three that we describe in 
fielding  situations 
that  spurious  amplitude 
modulations  on  the  nanosecond  time  scale  will 
cause phase distortions. The latter problem can be 
partially overcome by averaging over many cycles 
since  we  only  require  10  ns  resolution.  Another 
potential issue is that this technique does not take 
advantage of the optical amplification provided by 
interferometry.  The  interferometry  advantage  is 
present in the next techniques we discuss. 
A  variant  of  the  pulse  burst  method  is 
suggested  by  the  fact  that  the  wavelength  of  the 
pulses is longer than the surface roughness and so 
the  frequency  of  the  pulses  should  be  Doppler 
shifted on their return 2vcoscosc. For a 
10  GHz  amplitude  modulation  and  a  full  target 
approach  rate  of  v1000  ms  2vc    6.7  ppm  or 
67  KHz  out  of  10  GHz  a  small  but  discernible 
Fig  6.  The  angles  used  to  describe  the  full  target 
approach  rate  and  the  pulse  burst  method.  To 
resolve  an  optical  round-trip-time  to  better  than 
0.67 ps use the average of a burst of 100 pulses. 
in  PDV  by  creating 
Fig 7.  In the amplitude modulation approach we 
propose recovering the gain provided by the local 
amplitude  modulation  frequencies  where 
motion will show up as a phase change or Doppler 
shift  in  the  beat  frequency  between  these  two 
depending on the specific implementation. 
Fig.  8.    In  the  Amplitude  Modulation  Phase-Detection  approach  to  optical  ranging  one  uses  mixing 
between a 1550 nm CW laser and a 1 GHz frequency shifted copy to create an effective wavelength longer 
than  the  surface  roughness.  The  result  shown  demonstrates  that  the  change  in  distance  to  the  target  is 
measured despite no Doppler shift in the direction of motion. Optical velocimetry would record no motion. 
All components are commercial fiber-optic components. 
A  second  approach 
is  to  make  a  range 
measurement  in  a  time  short  compared  to  the 
to  making  an  effective 
roughness  is  to  make  the  measurement  in  a  time 
short compared to the time it takes the surface to 
transit one diameter of the illuminated spot. In this 
the  random  configuration  of  scattering 
centers  does  not  change  during  the  measurement 
measurement  beam.  Another  way  of  describing 
this time is the de-coherence time of the dynamic 
speckle  field  scattered  from  the  target.  The  beam 
spots  are  approximately  0.1  mm  giving  transit 
times  ranging  from  10  s  to  10  ns  for  lateral 
speeds  ranging  from  10  ms  to  10  kms.  The 
measurement time would then need to range from 
1 s to 1 ns picking 10 arbitrarily to guide the 
One  technique  available  is  to  sweep  the 
frequency  of  the  laser5.  The  time  delay  between 
the swept light returning from the target and an undelayed  reference  sweep  gives  a  beat  frequency 
proportional to the distance to the target as shown 
in Fig. 9. Notice that the true range to the target is 
measured  not  just  the  displacement  of  the  target. 
This  approach  is  the  basis  for  several  optical 
ranging  techniques  at  slow  speeds  such  as  the 
Luna  Technologies  Optical  Backscattering 
Reflectometer.  Note  that  we  have  also  recovered 
However  in  our  application  the  sweep  must 
complete in the required measurement time based 
on  beam  spot  diameter  and  target  motion  as  just 
discussed.  Insight  Photonics  Solutions  Lafayette 
CO  provided  a  fast-swept  Akinetic  laser  and 
technical  support  and  Colorado  School  of  Mines 
provided  PDV  equipment  and  a  testing  area  to 
allow  us  to  test  the  idea.  Our  projectile  was 
moving 20 ms and the spot size was 0.2 mm so 
our  transit  time  estimate  was  10  s.  The  laser 
sweep time was 5 s. We obtained a clear ranging 
signal as shown in Fig. 10. Further processing is 
required  to  eliminate  the  banding  and  properly 
calibrate  the  range.  It  is  of  interest  that  the 
coherence was maintained even though the transit 
time estimate is so close to the sweep time. 
Fig. 9. In frequency-swept optical ranging the delay arising from the extra propagation time to and 
from the target is proportional to the beat frequency detected in the interference signal between this and the 
reference beam local oscillator. Note that this technique gives the true absolute distance to the target not 
just the displacement. 
Fig. 10. Photon Doppler velocimetry measures a bore speed of 18 ms and sees no apparent motion in 
the perpendicular direction as the wedge moves under the beam as shown in the above spectrogram 
analysis of the beat frequency as a function of time. However the optical ranging bottom spectrogram 
shows the full range to the surface. 
The  fact  that  we  did  obtain  a  good  signal 
simultaneously  with 
a  PDV  measurement 
demonstrates the promise of this technique. Some 
at  National  Security 
Technologies  Corporation  are  pursing  shortening 
the time scale further by using a short-pulse laser 
to  provide  a  frequency  sweep  on  the  nanosecond 
Amplitude Modulation Beat Frequency 
Our  colleague  Dan  Knierim  has  proposed  a 
technique in which we create an illumination beam 
with a 1 THz amplitude modulation by combining 
two  infrared  lasers  and  a  0.991  THz  local 
oscillator  beam  by  combining  two  others.  By 
careful  choice  of  the  four  frequencies  that  create 
the two beams one can create beat frequencies at 
two measureable frequencies that will contain the 
traditional  velocimetry  signal.  In  addition 
appears  that  we  could  extract  the  displacement 
from the frequency of the beat between these two 
initial frequencies with non-linear post-processing 
the  detected  signals.  This  would  offer 
continuous  measurement  and  a  simpler  hardware 
set-up  than  the  other  techniques  discussed  here. 
We  are  trying  to  locate  resources  to  test  this 
two  demonstrated.  The  fact 
We have proof tests of two methods to make 
optical  measurements  of  the  approach  of  a  target 
with  0.1  mm  spatial  resolution  at  1  MHz.  These 
techniques  measure  the  full  approach  including 
the  approach  arising  from  the  lateral  motion  of  a 
tilted  surface  which  is  not  measured  by  optical 
velocimetry techniques. We have also proposed a 
third  technique  that  could  have  advantages  over 
velocimetry  measures 
velocity  along  the  beam  and  not  the  approach 
arising  from  laterally  moving  tilted  surfaces  is  a 
strength  of  velocimetry  it  allows  for  a  clear 
interpretation  of  velocimetry  measurements  as 
arising  only  from  the  projection  of  the  velocity 
vector  along  the  beam.  However  it  limits  the 
applicability of velocimetry in situations where the 
approach  of  material  must  be  measured.  All  the 
the  projection  of 
simultaneously  along  the  same  beam  direction  as 
optical velocimetry providing the possibility of a 
rich enhancement to optical measurements in highspeed dynamic experiments. 
A New Light Enhancement Coating Formulation to be used for TATB 
Detonation Front Detection 
M. Gresshoff M. Oldaker D. M. Hoffman K. J. McMullen G. E. Overturf III P. Pagoria M. X. Zhang 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory P. O. Box 808 Livermore CA 94551 USA 
Abstract.  This  poster  describes  a  light  enhancement  coating  applied  to  aid  in  the 
detection of the detonating front as captured by streak cameras. There is a discussion of 
the coating requirements application technique pot life cost powder availability worker 
safety and environmental concerns that constrained us towards the final product. Streak 
images of detonating half coated half-bare charges are shown to evaluate the light gain. 
Most  conventional  high  explosives  provide 
sufficient  light  at  the  detonating  front  to  allow 
direct  observation  by  streak  cameras.  However 
researchers12  have  determined 
requires  a  light  enhancement  coating.  It  has  been 
long  known  that  air  gaps  produce  light  in  the 
presence  of  a  shockwave  and  early  attempts  to 
produce a light enhancement coating centered on 
methods to trap air. Cigarette papers and coatings 
of  sand  were  initially  tried  but  in  an  effort  to 
spatial  distortions 
Aluminum  Silicofluoride  Al2SiF63  coatings 
became the standard. Bloom3 ultimately presented 
the  formulation  that  most  of  the  DOE  complex 
adopted and further determined a shock threshold 
for  obtaining  a  repeatable  flash.  Unfortunately 
in  recent  years  Aluminum  Silicofluoride  ASF 
has  had  limited  availability  and  reserve  supplies 
have  been  dwindling.  This  work  presents  a  new 
alternative  light  enhancement  coating  based  upon 
alumina  Al2O3  with  the  use  of  alumina  first 
suggested  by  Crutchmer  and  Kramer4  but  never 
The initial ASF mixture suggested by Bloom 
used  Kodak  Photo-Flo  with  poly-vinyl  alcohol 
PVA  surfactantbinder  in  an  aqueous  solution. 
However  this  lacquer  exhibited  poor  pot  life 
because  the  polymer  solution  tended  to  gel  upon 
standing.  This  resulted  in  a  coating  formulation 
that  increased  in  viscosity  over  time  causing 
difficulties  in  application  and  yielded  a  nonreproducible  coating  thickness.  This  improved 
alumina  formulation  uses  a  methyl  cellulose  400 
MC-400 surfactantbinder to provide suspension 
of the particles in solution good wettability of the 
coating to the surface and to act as a binder in the 
An  effective  spray  coating  process  has  been 
developed  with  a  water  carrier 
inhalation  and  fire  hazards  and  to  coat  in  an 
environmentally  correct  way.  While  developing 
the  alumina  coating  magnesium  oxide  MgO 
coatings  were  also  investigated  and  they  were 
found  to  react  with  the  aqueous  carrier  solution 
changing  particle  size  over  time.  Alumina  was 
found  to  be  better  overall  choice  because  of  its 
wide spread application as a polishing media thus 
making  it  more  readily  available  in  a  range  of 
particle sizes and morphologies.  
The  final  composition  after  testing  a  number 
of  sources  resulted  in  12.0  g  of  alumina  5.2 
micron Buehler 0.15 gram of MC-400 Aldrich 
in  60  ml  of  distilled  water.  The  particle  size  of 
alumina  was  found  not  to  change  when  the 
material  stands  in  aqueous  solution  for  up  to  two 
weeks or stirred at room temperature for 16 hours. 
The  morphology  of  the  5.2-micron  alumina  is 
shown in Figure 1 and the stability of particles in 
solution is shown in Figure 2.  
Fig.  1.    Scanning  electron  microscope  image  of 
5 micron alumina used in this study. 
cellulose MC Aldrich lot 18804-2 was added in 
one  portion  and  the  mixture  was  stirred  at  room 
temperature  until  a  clear  solution  was  reached 
needed  5-10  hours.  This  produces  the  methyl 
cellulose  stock  solution  in  a  concentration  of 
Ten grams 10 g of aluminum oxide Al2O3 
Buehler  5.0  micron  lot  40-6605-050-080  was 
added to 16 ml of the MC stock solution in a flask. 
The flask is sealed and shaken on a Vortex Mixer 
until  all  the  powder  is  suspended  in  the  aqueous 
MC solution. The solution is then transferred into 
the jar of a Badger Model-150 airbrush which was 
used to apply the coatings. 
thickness  was  measured  on  flat 
aluminum  plates  using  both  laser  and  white  light 
profilometry  with  both  methods  providing 
comparable results.  The laser profilometer was an 
Optimet  Metrology  Ltd.  ConoScan  3000  and  the 
white light  profilometry  was a  Zemetrics  ZeGage 
3D  optical  profiler.  Measurement  of  coating 
thickness  on  non-flat  parts  was  attempted 
however  depth  of  field  and  field  of  view  issues 
limited  the  resolution  in  determining  coating 
thicknesses.    Figure  3  shows  the  results  of  the 
coating  thickness  measurements  with  the  average 
for  each  measurement  for  a  given  weight  of 
  Particle  size  distribution  of  newly 
formulated  alumina  coating  and  two-week  old 
The stock solution for coating was prepared as 
follows.  Distilled water 400 ml was added into a 
500-ml Erlenmeyer flask equipped with a magnet 
stir  bar.  With  vigorously  stirring 8.0  g  of  methyl 
Fig. 3.  Coating thickness versus mass for alumina.  
Note that the sprayed area was 300 mm2 which is 
approximately  half  that  of  the  window  in  the 
hemisphere mask shown in Figure 4.   
A  mask  was  fabricated  for  the  explosive 
to  be  spray  coated 
Figure 4.  The mass of coated hemispheres were 
determined  gravimetrically  and 
calculated  from  the  exposed  area  yielding  a 
quantifiable  manner  in  which  to  discern  the 
various coatings in test fire as shown in Figure 3.  
In  the  future  we  will  perform  this  same  work  on 
the output of aluminum-cupped detonators which 
will  allow  for  use  of  profilometry  to  determine 
coating thickness. For reference the total mass of 
the TATB hemispheres used here is 26.1 g and the 
highest  coating  weight  was  24.4  mg  representing 
less than 0.1 of the total explosive weight.  
application  process  that  gave  consistent  results 
without being onerous.   
The  experimental  setup  used  in  the  study  is 
shown in a simple diagram in Figure 5.  Ultrafine 
TATB powder having a surface area greater than 2 
m2g BET method was pressed into hemispheres 
having  a  density  of  1.8  gcm3  93  TMD.  
Hemispheres of TATB were chosen for this study 
because many experiments performed at LLNL on 
TATB  are  spherical.    The  hemispheres  were 
the  output  of  a  RISI  RP-80 
exploding bridgewire or EBW detonator.  The RP80s 0.18-mm thick aluminum cup was spaced 1.6 
mm off of the TATB hemisphere with a piece of 
PMMA so that it acts as a flying plate initiator for 
Fig. 4.  Fixturing to mask TATB hemispheres for 
spray  coatings  of  the  light  enhancement  coating.  
The approximate area of the mask is 300 mm2. 
study  with  ASF  was 
developed  once  a  formulation  for 
lightenhancing  coating  that  provides  a  homogeneous 
reproducible  coating  had  been  finalized.    This 
experimental study was performed to determine if 
the new formulation of alumina provides sufficient 
light to be considered equivalent to or better than 
ASF  which  has  been  used  at  LLNL  for  light 
enhancement  since  the  1970s. 
objective was to determine if the alumina coating 
time-of-arrival  of  shocks  on 
surfaces  versus  our  historical  ASF  coatings.  This 
study  was  developed  under  the  assumption  that  a 
thicker  coating  would  act  as  a  delay  on  the 
measured shock arrival time therefore we strove 
to  minimize  the  thickness  while  still  maintaining 
intensity.  From  a  practical 
standpoint  we  also 
focused  on  a  coating 
the  same  or  better 
Fig. 5.  Setup used for alumina coating study.  A 
PMMA gray locator held the RP-80 detonator in 
place on the TATB hemisphere. 
thickness  on  the  hemisphere  using  an  optical 
profilometer  but  this  proved  more  difficult  than 
anticipated.    The  thickness  measurements  shown 
earlier  on  flat  aluminum  plates  give  a  rough 
indication  of  how  thick  the  coating  is  on  the 
hemispherical surface.  
A  Cordin  Model  132  rotating  mirror  camera 
with  Kodak  TMAX  P3200  film  was  used  to 
measure  the  streak  image  recorded  across  the 
hemispherical  surface  of  the  TATB.    The  film  is 
then scanned on an Epson flatbed scanner with the 
film placed between two panes of glass to ensure it 
is flat.  The film is scanned at a resolution of 2400 
dpi  saved  as  an  eight-bit  gray  scale  TIFF  and 
subsequently  analyzed  using  a  threshold  finding 
coating  either  ASF  or  alumina  and  the  other 
coated  with  another  weight  of  alumina  the  pole 
was taken as slightly off center to ensure it clearly 
represented  either  alumina  or  ASF.    Figure  7 
shows  an  apparent  trend  of  longer  function  times 
for  thinner  or  lower  mass  coatings.    This  is 
counter-intuitive  as  we  would  assume  that  a 
thicker coating would be slower.  Analysis of over 
60  shots  on  equivalent  TATB  boosters  using  the 
same firing system but with ASF coatings shows 
that  the  difference  from  minimum  to  maximum 
function  time  is  on  the  order  of  50  nanoseconds.  
The  data  here  shows  the  same  variation  from 
minimum  to  maximum  and  there  is  insufficient 
data to conclude a trend exists.  
Fig.  7.  RP-80  bridge-wire  burst  BWB  to  arrival 
time  of  the  detonation  wave  at  the  pole  of  the 
hemisphere  as  a  function  of  different  weight 
alumina  coatings.    ASF  has  a  BWB-Pole  time  of 
Further  shots  will  be  fired 
determine  if  the  trend  is  real.    These  will  use  a 
large capacitor bank to propel flat laminate flyers 
into plates coated with different thickness alumina 
to verify that there is no variation due to thickness.  
This work could not be completed in time for this 
Figures 8-15 show the breakout profiles from 
TATB  hemispherical  charges  coated  with  various 
weights of alumina with time increasing from top 
to  bottom.    All  weights  and  thicknesses  of 
coating provide sufficient light to discern a shock 
arrival  time  accurately  that  also  works  well  with 
comparison we also include a comparison against 
program that finds the shock wave arrival time and 
change in level of light intensity. 
A total of 10 boosters were fired with weight 
coatings of alumina ranging from 2.25 mg to 24.4 
mg  versus  the  control  samples  of  traditional 
hand painted ASF or no coating.  Figure 6 shows 
the  time  in  nanoseconds  for  the  light  intensity  to 
increase from a baseline level to 50 of the peak.  
This  was  calculated  as  the  time  from  where  the 
intensity  was  a  standard  deviation  above  the 
maximum  value  of  a  moving  average  before  the 
shock arrival time to approximately half of the full 
light intensity.  As can be seen in Figure 6 as the 
coating weight and thickness increase there is no 
delay  in  the  build-up  of  the  intensity  of  light.    It 
was  unknown  if  the  thicker  coatings  would  delay 
output of the air or slow the jump from no light to 
full intensity light.  Of importance to our study is 
that the alumina coatings were equivalent in their 
intensity  and  rate  at  which  they  flashed  to  the 
historical ASF coating.  The relative quick buildup  in  intensity  of  the  light  allows  for  higher 
accuracy  using  a  threshold  finding  routine  and 
in  determining  an 
absolute  time  of  arrival  of  the  shock  wave  as  the 
shock arrival time is distinct. 
Fig.  6.    Time  to  50  light  intensity  for  various 
thicknesses  of  alumina  compared 
existing hand-painted ASF coating two shots 
Figure 7 shows the absolute function time of 
the  detonator  and  TATB  hemisphere 
approximate pole of the hemisphere.  For coatings 
where half of the hemisphere was coated with one 
uncoated  TATB  to  show  the  light  enhancement 
provided by the coating.   
Fig. 8.  24.4-mg alumina coating 
Fig. 9.  19.4-mg alumina coating 
Fig.  12.    8.2-mg  alumina  coating.    Off-center  on 
the right side is minimally coated with alumina for 
Fig.  13.    4.6-mg  alumina  coating.    Off-center  on 
the right side is minimally coated with alumina for 
Fig. 10.  14.7-mg alumina coating.  Off-center on 
the right side is minimally coated with alumina for 
Fig. 14.  13.2-mg alumina coating.  Off-center on 
the left is alumina coated with four passes of the 
spray gun for comparison. 
Fig.  11.    9.6-mg  alumina  coating.    Off-center  on 
the right side is minimally coated with alumina for 
Fig.  15.    Left  side  is  coated  with  13.35  mg  of 
alumina and the right side is coated with 2.25 mg 
Figures 16 and 17 show a comparison of alumina 
coatings  with  the  historical  ASF  coating.    Both 
shots show the alumina to provide a more distinct Shock Desensitization Experiments and Reactive Flow Modeling on Self-Sustaining 
LX-17 Detonation Waves 
Kevin S. Vandersall Frank Garcia Craig M. Tarver and Laurence E. Fried 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94550 
Energetic Materials Center 
Abstract. Shock experiments were performed on the plastic bonded explosive PBX LX17 92.5 TATB 7.5 Kel-F binder using a single low amplitude shock wave at one 
end of a cylindrical sample to pre-compress the material just prior to detonating the LX17 charge from the other end to investigate the possibility of shock desensitization. A 101 
mm  diameter  propellant  driven  gas  gun  and  LX-17  sample  containing  manganin 
piezoresistive pressure gauge packages were utilized to qualitatively measure the shock 
desensitization  effects.  At  pre-shock  pressures  of  0.68  and  1.1  GPa  LX-17  showed  
failing detonation waves in the pre-shocked region. However at a pre-shock pressure of 
0.52 GPa the detonation wave proceeded through the LX-17. This shock desensitization 
effect has been observed in other explosives containing PBX 9404 and Composition B-3. 
The LX-17 Ignition and Growth model including a time dependent shock desensitization 
model  was  used  to  explain  the  rate  of  decay  of  the  detonation  wave  in  the  shock 
desensitized LX-17 and the detonation of more weakly shocked LX-17.  
Shock  desensitization  or  dead  pressing  of 
porous  solid  explosives  can  either  be  a  useful 
property  if  one  wants  to  prohibit  detonation  in 
some or all of an explosive charge or an unwanted 
property  if  one  requires  full  detonation  of  the 
charge.    In  the  classic  paper  of  Campbell  and 
Travis  on  PBX  9404 
nitrocellulose  and  3  chloroethylphosphate  and 
Composition B-3 60 RDX and 40 TNT 1 it 
was  shown  that  within  a  certain  range  of  weak 
shock  strengths  the  pressures  were  sufficient  to 
compress all of the voids and other discontinuities 
without  causing  significant  exothermic  reaction.  
When  detonation  waves  entered 
these  precompressed dead zones they were extinguished 
after  propagation  times  determined  by  the  weak 
shock  pressures.  For  PBX  9404  and  Composition 
B-3  the  measured  pressure  range  for  shock 
desensitization was 1  2.4 GPa. Below 1 GPa the 
shock waves were too weak to close all of the hot 
spot  sites.  The  approaching  detonation  wave  did 
falter  but  initiated  enough  remaining  voids  and 
other  discontinuities 
through  that  region.  Above  2.4  GPa  the  shock 
wave  was  strong  enough  to  create  reacting  hot 
spots which provided extra ignition sites for the 
oncoming detonation wave. This detonation wave 
continued to propagate with no fluctuations.  
Insensitive high explosives based on triamino 
trinitrobenzene TATB are very difficult to shock 
initiate have relatively large failure diameters fail 
rapidly when their detonation waves are perturbed 
and  leave  dead  zones  of  partial  or  no  reaction 
when their detonation waves encounter changes in 
entered the pre-compressed LX-17 region.  This 
microseconds at 1.2 to 1.4 GPa. 
Quantitative pressure - time measurements of 
the  direct  interaction  of  weak  shock  waves  and 
LX-17 detonation waves are needed.  In this paper 
experiments  are  reported  that  use  the  LLNL  101 
mm  gas  gun  to  impact  LX-17  targets  containing 
embedded  manganin  pressure  gauges  to  measure 
the  pressure  histories  of  weak  precursor  shock 
waves  detonation  waves  and  the  failure  or 
continued  detonation  of  the  detonation  waves  in 
the  pre-compressed  region.  Teflon  flyer  plates 
were fired at low 277 to 491 ms velocities into 
LX-17 charges.  This created weak shocks of 0.52 
to 1.1 GPa in LX-17 targets. At the correct times 
detonators  initiated  HMX  charges  at  the  opposite 
ends of the LX-17 charges. The HMX detonation 
waves promptly initiated LX-17 detonation waves 
interacted  with  the  weak  unreactive  shock  waves 
in  LX-17  within  the  charge.    At  shock  pressures 
above 0.68 GPa failures of the LX-17 detonation 
waves occurred within one s after the collision of 
the  waves.  The  Ignition  and  Growth  calculations 
predicted  the  detonation  wave  failures  and  the 
rates  of  decay  of  the  peak  shock  pressures in  the 
shock-desensitized  LX-17.  At  an  impact  shock 
pressure of 0.52 GPa the LX-17 detonation wave 
propagated  through  the  pre-compressed  LX-17.  
Thus a shock desensitization region between 0.52 
and 0.68 GPa was determined. 
Figure  1  shows  a  description  of  a  typical 
experiment.  The  projectile  consisted  of  a  sabot 
with  a  Teflon  flyer  plate  on  the  impact  surface. 
The  explosive  was  in  the  form  of  thin  disks  with 
gauge packages inserted in between with the total 
explosive  thickness  approximately  28  mm.  The 
manganin  piezoresistive  foil  pressure  gauges 
armored with sheets of Teflon insulation on each 
manganese alloy that changes electrical resistance 
with pressure i.e. piezoresistive. Also used were 
PZT Crystal pins to measure the projectile velocity 
and its tilt planarity of impact. During the shock 
the  gauge.  Manganin 
Experimental Procedure 
studies  have  observed 
geometry.  Several  researchers  have  speculated 
the  shock  desensitization  properties  of 
TATB  based  explosives.  Several  qualitative 
desensitization  of  TATB  in  various  geometries. 
These  are  discussed  by  Tarver  2  who  used 
quantitative  experimental  data  X-rays  and  PDV 
probes  plus  Ignition  and  Growth  reactive  flow 
desensitization experiments by Hart 3. Hart used 
hemispherical  ultrafine  TATB  booster  charges 
placed  on  steel  plates  of  various  dimensions  to 
detonate  LX-17  92.5  TATB  75  Kel-F 
binder  creating  spherically  diverging  detonation 
waves. Upon reaching the top and bottom edges of 
the  steel  plates  the  LX-17  detonation  waves 
turned  these  corners  leaving  small  dead  zones 
of  partially  reacted  LX-17  but  continuing  to 
propagate. Upon turning the bottom corners of the 
steel plates the detonation waves traveled into 1 or 
2 cm wide channels of LX-17 between the bottoms 
of  the  steel  plates  and  the  tops  of  5  mm  thick 
aluminum plates holding the entire charges. These 
1  or  2  cm  thick  LX-17  layers  had  been  preshocked  by  the  shock  waves  formed  in  the  steel 
plates  by  the  original  detonations.  Upon  entering 
the  pre-shocked  LX-17  channels 
detonation  waves  quickly 
confirmed by X-rays taken of the expansion of the 
aluminum  plates  at  several  times  and  by  PDV 
aluminum  plates  at  several  distances  from  the 
center  points.  The  PDV  probes  showed  low 
velocities  at  all  points  on  the  aluminum  free 
surfaces  under  the  steel  plates  indicating  shock 
desensitization  and  high  velocities  on  all 
aluminum  free  surfaces  outside  the  steel  plates 
indicating  detonation.  The  Ignition  and  Growth 
LX-17  model  parameters  which  include  time 
calculated the shock desensitization for the LX-17 
in  the  channels  the  aluminum  plate  jump-off 
the  aluminum  plate  free  surface 
velocity  histories  of  the  PDV  probes  for  all  5 
experiments. The calculated shock pressures in the 
pre-shocked LX-17 in the channels were 1.2 to 1.4 
GPa. The weak shocks traversed through the LX17 
microseconds before the LX-17 detonation waves 
the  channels  approximately  2 
free  surface  velocity 
Velocity Crystal Pins 
Figure  1.  A  schematic  diagram  for  the  shock 
desensitization  experiments  4817  and  4829. 
Experiment  4812  used  a  similar  experimental 
design except a Composition B booster was used.  
experiments  oscilloscopes  measure  change  of 
voltage  as  result  of  resistance  change  in  the 
gauges  which  were  then  converted  to  pressure 
using  the  hysteresis  corrected  calibration  curve 
published  elsewhere  45.    Table  1  lists  the  flyer 
calculated shock durations for the three shots.  
Table 1. Shock Desensitization Experiments. 
Experimental Results 
In-situ  gauge  records  for  experiments  4812 
4817  and  4829  are  provided  in  Figs.  2  -  4 
respectively.  The detonator in shot 4812 fired late 
and  caused  the  Composition  B  detonation  to 
initiate  the  LX-17  about  10  s  late. 
rarefactions  caused  gauge  stretching  before  the 
detonation  wave  arrived.    The  detonation  wave 
was  extinguished  but  the  measured  pressures  are 
uncertain.  Shots 4817 and 4829 fired on time and 
produced excellent pressure histories. 
Figure 2. Manganin gauge records for shot 4812. 
Figure 3. Manganin gauge records for shot 4817. 
Figure 4. Manganin gauge records for shot 4829. 
Shot  4817  exhibited  detonation  at  28  25  and  20 
mm  positions  and  decaying  shocks  at  the  14  8 
and 0 mm gauges.  Shot 4829 showed detonation 
pressures  at  all  6  gauges  indicating  that  the  0.52 
GPa input pressure did not completely desensitize 
Ignition and Growth Desensitization Model 
The Ignition and Growth reactive flow model 
of shock initiation and detonation has been used to 
understand  many  shock  initiation  and  detonation 
studies  of  solid  explosives  and  propellants  in 
several  1D  2D  and  3D  codes  6.  The  set  of 
Ignition  and  Growth  parameters  for  detonating 
LX-17 was established by modeling many 1D 2D 
and  some  3D  experiments.    The  model  uses  two 
Jones-Wilkins-Lee  JWL  equations  of  state  one 
for the unreacted explosive and one for its reaction 
products in the temperature dependent form 
V  CvTV              1 
where  p  is  pressure  in  megabars  V  is  relative 
volume  T  is  temperature    is  the  measured 
Gruneisen  coefficient  Cv    is    the  average  heat 
capacity and A B R1 and R2 are constants.  The 
reaction rate law for the conversion of explosive to 
dFdt  I1-Fbo-1-ax  G11-FcFdpy  
             0FFigmax                      0FFG1max 
                  G21-FeFgpz                                   2 
                      FG2minF1 
where F is the fraction reacted t is time  is the 
current density o is the initial density  and I G1 
G2 a b c d e g x y z Figmax FG1max and  FG2min 
are  constants.  The  mixture  equations  assume 
pressure and temperature equilibration between the 
unreacted explosive and its reaction products.  
The  unreacted  JWL  for  LX-17  is  fit  to 
nanosecond  time  resolved  von  Neumann  spike 
data  for  detonating  LX-17  7.  The  weak  shock 
experiments  are  calculated  using  the  unreacted 
elastic-plastic  JWL  form.  This  equation  of  state 
form  modeled  previous  low-pressure  1  GPa 
manganin  gauge  data  on  unreacted  LX-10  95 
HMX5  Viton  8.  The  reaction  product  JWL 
equation  of  state  is  fit  to  the  wall  velocity 
expansion  data  from  cylinder  tests  and  laser 
interferometric  plate  push  data  for  steady  and 
overdriven detonations 9. The three-term rate law 
describes  the  three  stages  of  reaction  generally 
observed  in  shock  initiation  and  detonation  of 
explosive  detonation  modeling  the  first  term  of 
Equation  2  represents 
explosive  as  it  is  compressed  by  the  leading  3D 
shock wave creating hot regions at the triple shock 
interactions 10. The fraction of explosive ignited 
is assumed to be equal to the void volume of the 
pressed  explosive  and  is  reacted  in  less  than  a 
nanosecond. For LX-17 at 1.905 gcm3 the initial 
void volume is 2. The second reaction rate in Eq. 
4  models  the  rapid  formation  of  the  major 
reaction product gases CO2 N2 H2O CO etc. in 
highly  vibrationally  excited  states  and 
subsequent expansion and equilibration 10. This 
process  for  LX-17  has  been  measured  to  take 
approximately  80  nanoseconds  by 
techniques  1112.  The  third  term  in  Eq.  4  is 
used  to  describe  the  relatively  slow  diffusion 
controlled  formation  of  nanometer  size  solid 
carbon particles diamond graphite or amorphous 
carbon  from  single  or  small  groups  of  carbon 
atoms.  For  LX-17  the  last  20  of  the  chemical 
energy  release  is  assumed  to  be  due  to  solid 
graphite  nanoparticle  formation  by  a  diffusion 
controlled  process.  Experimentally  the  graphite 
formation  in  LX-17  has  been  observed  to  take 
approximately 300 nanoseconds 13. The reaction 
zone  length  for  detonating  LX-17  is  3  mm  400 
ns.  The LX-17 parameters are listed in Table 2. 
To  quantitatively  model  pressure  and  time 
dependent shock desensitization a desensitization 
rate  law  was  added  to  the  Ignition  reaction  rate 
term  in  Eq.  2  by  de  Oliveira  et  al.  14.  The 
desensitization rate S is defined as 
               S  A p 1 -                        3 
where A is a constant p is the shock pressure  is 
a  constant  and   varies  from  zero  in  a  pristine 
explosive to one in a fully desensitized explosive. 
mechanism.  The desensitization model introduces 
four new parameters A  a1 and Fc.  Until now 
no  well-defined  time  resolved  experiments  such 
as  those  of  Campbell  and  Travis  1  had  been 
done  on  LX-17.  de  Oliveria  et  al.  14  estimated 
values of A  1000   0.001 a1  0.50 and Fc  
0.01  to  produce  reasonable  dead  zones  for 
several  corner  turning  14  and  desensitization 
experiments  2.    For  low  shock  pressures  these 
values yield desensitization times of 1.29 s for a 
1 GPa shock and 0.26 s for a 5 GPa shock.  These 
parameters  were  used 
desensitization experiments in this study. 
Comparisons  of  Experimental  and  Modeling 
The  LX-17  Ignition  and  Growth  model  was 
first  applied  to  shot  4812  in  which  a  1.1  GPa 
impacts  an  LX-17  charge  before  a 
Composition  B  booster  initiates  detonation  at  the 
opposite  LX-17  boundary.  Unfortunately 
initiation  was  10  s  late  and  side  rarefaction 
waves  caused  the  manganin  gauges  to  stretch 
before  the  LX-17  detonation  wave  arrived  at  the 
gauge positions. This caused the gauge resistance 
to increase as shown in Fig. 2.  Since a sustained 
shock  pressure  of  6.5  GPa  is  required  to  initiate 
any  exothermic  reaction 
apparent increases in pressure before the arrival of 
the  detonation  wave  cannot  be  real.  Even  though 
the gauges stretched they clearly showed that the 
LX-17  detonation  wave  rapidly  failed  when  it 
reached  the  pre-compressed  explosive  but  the 
measured decaying shock pressures are not reliable 
for  detailed  modeling.  The  Ignition  and  Growth 
model  did  predict 
agreement with the results of Hart 3. 
this  1.1  GPa  shock 
The  excellent  ignition  timings  of  the  LX-17 
detonations  in  the  other  two  experiments  were 
created  by  using  combinations  of  LX-10  95 
HMX  5  Viton  for  prompt  detonation  by  the 
detonators  followed  by  LX-04  85  HMX15 
Viton  to  avoid  significant  LX-17  detonation 
overdrives.  Shot  4817  with  a  calculated  initial 
shock pressure of 0.68 GPa showed in Fig. 3 that 
the  LX-17  detonation  wave  propagated  from  the 
rear of the charge at 28 mm to the gauges at 25 and 
Table 2. LX-17 detonation modeling parameters. 
Initial density o 1.905 gcm3 
E0  0.064 Mbar  G2  30 
The  density  threshold  a  in  Eq.  2  is  redefined  to 
be a linear function of  
       a  a0 1-   a1  
where a0 and a1 are constants. The relative density 
threshold  for  ignition  of  the  pristine  explosive 
becomes  1    a0  and  for  the  fully  desensitized 
explosive the relative density for ignition becomes 
1  a1. Additionally the second reaction rate term 
in Eq. 2 is modified so that it turns on only when 
F exceeds a minimum FG1min which is assumed to 
be a linear function of  
                   5 
where  Fc  is  a  constant  related  to  the  initial 
porosity.    This  second  modification  provides  a 
competition  between  desensitization  and  reaction 
thus  determines  an  extinction 
using the LX-17 unreacted JWL equation of state.  
An initial shock wave with a pressure of 6.8 GPa 
and  pulse  duration  of  3.0  s  did  completely 
eliminate  the  hot  spot  sites  resulting  in  the  time 
dependent  failure  of  the  detonation  wave  in  the 
pre-compressed LX-17.  A 6.8 GPa shock pressure 
corresponds to a compression of 5.1. 
Shot  N4817 LX-17 Desensitization
Figure  5.  Experimental  and  calculated  pressure 
histories for shot 4817 0.68 GPa initial pressure.  
for  comparison.  While 
20 mm depths. Then it failed rapidly at the 14 8 
and 0 mm gauge positions. Figure 5 compares the 
experimental and calculated using the parameters 
mentioned above pressure time histories for shot 
4817 in the time period 53 to 60 s of the shock 
and  detonation  wave  interactions.  The  timing  of 
the  arrival  of  the  detonation  wave  at  the  LX04LX-17  boundary 
experimentally measured times of the 28 mm deep 
agreement  is  encouraging  the  calculated  shock 
pressures  for  the  0  8  and  14  mm  gauges  in  the 
experimental  values  and  the  calculated  arrival 
times  are  earlier  than  the  measured  arrival  times.  
This  implies  that  the  desensitization  rate  is  faster 
than these calculations predict. The value of A in 
Eq.  3  controls  this  rate  and  setting  A  equal  to 
1000  was  based  on  indirect  measurements.  To 
better match the experimental data the value of A 
was  increased  to  1200.  Figure  6  shows  the 
comparisons  with  the  three  gauge  records  that 
show  desensitization  0  8  and  14  mm  and  the 
two  desensitization  rates.  The  use  of  this  larger 
rate  constant  produced  faster  shock  decays  and 
later arrival times at the 14 8  and 0 mm gauges. 
region  are  higher 
The lowest shock pressure shot 4829 produced 
an  initial  shock  pressure  of  0.52  GPa  which  did 
not  completely  desensitize  the  LX-17.  Figure  7 
shows  comparisons  of 
the  experimental  and 
calculated  pressure  histories.  The  calculations 
that  shock  desensitization  was  not 
complete  even  at  the  0  mm  gauge  and  that  the 
detonation would not fail.   
The  shock  desensitization  experiments  on  the 
insensitive  PBX  LX-17  have  provided  unique 
quantitative  data  on  the  weak  shock  pressures 
compressions  and  pulse  durations  required  to 
cause  time  dependent  shock  desensitization  of  a 
TATB-based  explosive.  An  initial  shock  wave 
with a pressure of 0.52 GPa and pulse duration of 
3.3 s did not cause complete elimination of all the 
possible  hot  spot  formation  sites  and  thus  the 
oncoming   detonation  continued  to propagate  in 
the  pre-compressed  region.    A  shock  pressure  of 
5.2  GPa  corresponds  to  a  compression  of  4.1 
Figure  6.  Experimental  and 
pressure histories using A  1000 and 1200 at the 
0 8 and 14 mm gauge positions for shot 4817. 
Shot 4829 Shock Desensitization
Figure  7.  Experimental  and  calculated  pressure 
histories for shot 4829 
A narrow range of uncertainty of 0.52 to 0.68 
GPa was found for the shock pressure required to 
cause shock desensitization of LX-17 with a pulse 
duration  of  approximately  3  s.  This  shock 
pressure  range  is  smaller  than  those  found  by 
Campbell  and  Travis  1  for  PBX  9404  and 
Composition B-3 which were both approximately 
1    2.4  GPa.    The  larger  ranges  for  these  two 
explosives  are  due  to  the  higher  shock  sensitivity 
of PBX 9404 and Composition B-3 which created 
reacting  hot  spots  in  the  pre-compressed  region.  
When  the  detonation  waves  interacted  with  the 
reacting  hot  spots  they  continued  to  detonate. 
Since  LX-17  does  not  react  in  sustained  shock 
waves  at  pressures  below  6.5  GPa  oncoming 
detonation  waves  do  not  encounter  reacting  hot 
spots and either propagate or fail. 
The pressure gauge records in the desensitized 
regions of LX-17 yielded quantitative data on the 
rates at which the LX-17 detonation waves failed.  
Campbell  and  Travis  1  found  that  the  times 
required  for  PBX  9404  and  Composition  B-3 
detonation wave failure were similar to the shock 
pulse  duration  times  required  for  short  pulse 
duration  shock  initiation  of  the  two  explosives. 
The oncoming detonation waves continued to react 
as  they  passed  over  regions  of  reacting  hot  spots 
and  then  failed  when  regions  with  only  burned 
its  detonation  waves  continue 
out  and  compressed  unreacted  former  hot  sites.  
Since LX-17 does not react in the pre-compressed 
propagate if they encounter any remaining hot spot 
sites  and  fail  when  all  of  these  sites  have  been 
eliminated.    The  high  activation  energy  chemical 
rates  of  TATB-based 
kinetic  decomposition 
explosives  16  are  very  sensitive 
temperatures  and  pressures  and  their  detonation 
waves fail rapidly at velocities only 3 lower than 
the  steady  state  Chapman-Jouguet  C-J  velocity 
17.  The  difficulty  of  corner  turning  by  TATB 
detonation waves is also related to its sensitivity to 
pressure  and  temperature  which  are  lowered  by 
the  rarefaction  waves  produced  by  geometry 
changes  18.  The  measured  rapid  decreases  in 
shock  pressure  in  the  failing  LX-17  detonation 
waves in shots 4812 and 4817 are consistent with 
both of these properties of detonating TATB-based 
Finally  measurements  of 
decrease  rates  and  the  critical  shock  pressure  or 
relative density for complete shock desensitization 
of  LX-17  are  necessary  to  make  progress  in 
desensitization model. As shown in Figs. 5 and 6 
the  estimated  value  of  the  desensitization  rate 
constant  A    1000  under-predicted  the  observed 
pressure decreases and the resulting arrival times.  
Better  agreement  was  obtained  using  A    1200.  
The  measured  compressions  of  0.041  for  little  or 
no  desensitization  at  0.52  GPa  and  0.051  for 
complete desensitization at 0.68 GPa can be used 
desensitization  and  a1 
the  completion  of 
desensitization in Eq. 4.  The value of Fc in Eq. 
5  is  related  to  the  fraction  of  the  explosive  that 
has to react before complete desensitization occurs 
to  possibility  allow  detonation  to  continue  in  the 
pre-compressed  explosive.    It  would  be  very 
experimentally using different initial densities. 
the  values  of  a0 
This  experimental  and  modeling  effort 
represents  a  good  quantitative  start 
understanding  shock  desensitization  in  insensitive 
high  explosives  but  more  experimental  and 
modeling  work  is  required.    For  example  the 
shock  desensitization  of  cold  TATB-based 
explosives would be interesting to study. 
The  authors  would  like  to  thank  the  101  mm 
powder  gun  crew  including  Sam  Weaver  Cory 
McLean Steve Caldwell and Paul Dealmeida for 
all  their  hard  work  in  obtaining  the  embedded 
pressure  gauge  records.  The  excellent  hardware 
fabrication  by  Greg  Silva  is  greatly  appreciated. 
This  work  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the 
U.S.  Department  of  Energy  by  Lawrence 
Livermore National  Laboratory  under  Contract 
Structural Damage Equivalence of Selected Explosive Materials Based on the 
Response of Thin Circular Plates Subjected to Blast Loading 
Kimberly K. Haulenbeek and Edmundo Corona PhD 
Explosives Applications Department 
Solid Mechanics Department 
Sandia National Laboratories Albuquerque NM 87123 
Abstract. Determining explosive equivalence remains a complex problem because it is a 
function  of  the  effect  of  interest.    The  metric  of  interest  in  the  present  work  is  blast 
damage to a thin aluminum plate.  In order to determine structural damage equivalence of 
different explosive materials Sandia National Laboratories developed a circular plate test 
method.  The present work uses this test method to determine explosive equivalence of 
selected  explosive  formulations.    It  is  important  to  conduct  this  equivalence  testing 
because  actual  explosive  performance  may  deviate  from  the  optimal  performance 
predicted  by  thermochemical  calculations.    Each  test  was  conducted  by  detonating  an 
explosive charge located at a standoff distance of 20 inches from the center of the target.  
High speed 3D digital image correlation was used to capture the deformation of the plate 
as a function of time.  Metrics developed from the deformation were then used in order to 
compare  relative  damage  between  the  explosive  material  of  interest  and  C-4  the 
reference  explosive.    These  metrics  were  used  to  determine  explosive  equivalence  for 
each explosive material.    
experimentally-derived  equivalence  for  selected 
explosive materials.  In order to generate baseline 
information  for  this  method  blast  damage  was 
imposed on thin circular aluminum 2024-T3 plates 
with  center-initiated  spherical  C-4  charges  C-4 
serves as the reference explosive.  The mass of C-4 
the  plate  experienced 
significant  plastic  deformation  without  leading  to 
plate  failure.    As  such  each  test  required  a  new 
The  mass  of  the  explosive  of  interest  was 
calculated  using  that  materials  mass  factora 
which  provides  a  straightforward  method  for 
determining  a  mass  which  is  equivalent  to  the 
mass  of  the  C-4  reference  charge  based  on  each 
respective  mechanical  energy  of 
thermochemical  calculations 
were  conducted  using  Cheetah  6.0b  which  takes 
the density of the formulation into account.  Blast 
damage  obtained  with 
theoretically-equivalent  masses  was 
a Souers and Maienschein 2009 
b Bastea et al. 2010 
compared  to  the  C-4  baseline  data  using  damage 
metrics  which  were  developed  based  on  the  fullfield measurement of the deformation of the plate 
as a function of time.  This comparison was used 
to update the values of the mass factors in order to 
calculate structural damage equivalence.   
Experimental Setup and Procedure 
Each  test  measured  the  response  of  a  thin 
aluminum plate to a detonation of the explosive of 
interest.  Each 48 diameter plate was clamped at 
its boundary between a 2 thick steel plate with a 
44  diameter  opening  and  a  2  wide  by  2  thick 
ring.  No slippage was observed to have occurred 
at  the  metal  plate  boundary  during  any  test 
assumption. Figure 1 shows a plan view of the test 
Figure 1. Plan view of test setup. 
The  charge  was  detonated  at  a  standoff 
distance  of  20  inches  from  the  center  of  the 
circular  plate  test  fixture.    The  plate  was  painted 
with a black and white speckle pattern Figure 2 
on  the  side  opposite  from  the  blast  in  order  to 
enable non-contacting displacement measurements 
as a function of time using high speed 3D digital 
image  correlation.    The  test  fixture  was  also 
painted  with  a  speckle  pattern  in  order  to  assess 
whether  displacement  of 
the  structure  was 
significant.    Results  showed  fixture  deflection  to 
Plate  deformation  was  recorded  using  two 
Phantom  cameras  with  a  minimum  frame  rate  of 
35000  frames  per  second  and  a  minimum 
resolution  of  0.21  in.pixelc.    The  cameras  were 
located approximately 18.6 feet from the center of 
the plate and approximately 8.6 feet apart with an 
included angle of about 27 degrees.  The software 
used  for  digital  image  correlation  was  Vic3D 
produced by Correlated Solutions Inc.   
Figure 2.  Test fixture with plate.  
Each explosive mixture of interest was tested 
three  times  except  for  HME-02  and  HME-12 
which were tested twice and HME-10 which was 
tested  once  for  security  reasons  the  explosive 
formulations  are  not  referred  to  by  name.    Each 
material was placed into a spherical configuration 
and  was  center-initiated  with  either  a  RISI 
detonator or a RISI RP-85 detonator which is an 
RP-83  detonator  designed  for  submersion.    The 
C-4 baseline  explosive was  tested  five  times  in  a 
molded spherical configuration and detonated with 
Mass Factor and Equivalence 
The mass factor  is defined asd 
Industries  Systems 
c Larsen et al. 2012 
d Souers and Maienschein 2009 
                       
0 is  the  mechanical  energy  of  detonation 
relationship  shows  that  an  explosive  with  a  mass 
factor greater than unity is less energetic than C-4 
while an explosive with a mass factor smaller than 
unity  is  more  energetic  than  C-4.  Note  that  the 
inverse of the mass factor may be used to provide 
explosive equivalence to C-4.   
The  mechanical  energy  of  detonation  can  be 
calculated using a thermochemical code given the 
density and chemical composition of the explosive 
in  question.      In  order  to  obtain  the  equivalent 
mass  this  mass  factor  is  multiplied  by  the 
reference mass of C-4 as follows   
For  example  if  the  mass  of  C-4  used  in 
baseline  testing  is  one  kg  and  the  explosive  of 
interest has a mass factor of 1.5 the required mass 
of  the  explosive  of  interest  would  be  1.5  kg.  
Further  since  the  example  material  has  a  mass 
factor  of  1.5  its  C-4  equivalence  would  be  0.67 
i.e. the inverse of 1.5.   
Data  from  3D  digital 
provided  detailed  deformation  time  history  of  the 
test  plate.  Circumferential  averages  of 
measured  displacement  components  with  respect 
to  time  were  used  to  calculate  two  quantities  in 
order to compare explosive material performance  
1 area percent change of the plate surface and 2 
volume  contained  by  the  concave  side  of  the 
deformed  platee.  The  analyzed  region  included  a 
50  cm  radius  about  the  geometric  center  of  the 
plate because areas near the edge of the plate were 
shaded  by  the  fixture  and  did  not  contain  good 
data.  The area and volume are calculated from 
e Larsen et al. 2012 
where R is  50  cm  r   is  the  undeformed  radial 
coordinate  u is  the  radial  displacement  and w is 
the out-of-plane displacement.       
Figure  3  and  Figure  4  show  representative 
plots  of  these  values  for  C-4  and  a  selected 
explosive  formulation. 
appeared qualitatively similar to that shown in the 
representative  plots.    Inspection  of  these  figures 
shows that the plates exposed to detonations from 
C4  respond  faster  than  those  exposed  to  the  test 
explosive due to a faster moving shock wave.  The 
maximum  values  for percent  area  change and for 
volume  indicated  with  symbols  in  Figure  3  and 
Figure  4  were  then  used  to  determine  damage 
equivalence.  Average values along with standard 
deviations are given for each material in Table 1. 
Table 1.  Averages and Standard Deviations for 
Maximum Area Increase and Maximum 
General  observations  can  be  made  from 
inspection of the information in Table 1. First the 
experimentally-derived  damage  equivalence 
generally  but  not  always  less  than  the  value 
which is predicted by the mass factor. This means 
that most of the explosive materials included here 
impose  even  less  damage  to  a  structure  than 
expected.  Additionally they generally impose less 
damage than C-4. Also the area-based equivalence 
and  volume-based  equivalence  appear 
reasonably close to each other indicating that the 
experimental data is self-consistent.   
the  general  method 
determining  damage  equivalence  for  a  given 
material is 1 get the mass factor for the material 
using  Cheetah  2  conduct  circular  plate  testing 
using  the  correct  material  mass  3  calculate 
required  area  and  volume  metrics  based  on  3D 
image  correlation  data  4  determine 
experimental  equivalence  based  on  material  data 
Table 2.  Experimentally-derived equivalences. 
This  section  assesses  damage  equivalence 
derived  from  experimental  data.    The  method  for 
performing  this  calculation  is  based  on  the  trend 
observed in previous researchf which indicates that 
if  one  plots  maximum  percent  area  increase  or 
maximum volume with respect to normalized mass 
defined as the mass of the explosive being tested 
divided by  the  product  of  its  mass  factor  and  the 
mass  of  the  C-4  reference  charge  the  slope  of 
these lines are nearly independent of the material 
computationally  by  simulating 
calculating  the  plate  deflections.    The  material 
which supplied the equation of state to provide the 
slope for the line is C-4.  Using the slope of this 
maximum  percent  area  increase  or  maximum 
volume from the average measured value for that 
material  to  the  average  measured  value  for  C-4 
giving the normalized mass of that material which 
would be required to produce the same response as 
that produced by C-4.  The experimentally-derived 
mass  factor  is  the  product  of  the  experimentallyderived  normalized  mass  and  the  mass  factor  of 
that  material  as  used  in  the  experiment.    The 
experimentally-derived  C-4  equivalence  is simply 
the  inverse  of  the  experimentally-derived  mass 
factor as noted in the Test Method section.  This 
technique  is  shown  graphically  in  Figure  5  and 
Figure  6  with  the  dotted  lines  representing  the 
slope given from the C-4 equation of stateg.  The 
figure includes error bars with a magnitude of 3 
standard deviations representing 99 confidence 
from  that  materials  mean  value  allowing  visual 
comparison between the magnitude of a materials 
standard  deviation  to  that  of  C-4  which  is 
presented as horizontal lines in the figures.  Table 
equivalence  for  each  material  along  with  the 
the  experimentally-determined 
equivalence  based  on  -  3  standard  deviations. 
Additionally this table includes the value for C-4 
equivalence which is calculated from Cheetah.   
f Larsen et al. 2012 
g Larsen et al. 2012 
Figure 3.  Representative area change  with respect to time. 
Figure 4.  Representative volume liters with respect to time. 
Figure 5. Calculated normalized mass for explosive materials based on area criterion. 
Figure 6. Calculated normalized mass for materials based on volume criterion. 
Mass  factors  provide  a  conservative  estimate 
to  calculating  amounts  of  material  which  will 
cause  equivalent  damage.    This  method  can  be 
implemented inexpensively using thermochemical 
calculations.  However  since  this  research  shows 
that the mass factor tends to over-predict damage 
it is important to conduct circular plate testing in 
order  to  obtain  a  realistic  estimate  of  damage 
This work was conducted with support of the US 
Department  of  Homeland  Security  Science  and 
Technology Directorate. Flash X-Ray Resolved Trajectory of Discrete Particles from  
Embedded Explosive Detonation 
David E. Stevens and Michael J. Murphy 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
8000 East Avenue L-098 Livermore California 94551 
Abstract.  Flash  radiography  experiments  and  modeling  are  used  to  diagnose  the 
trajectory  of  discrete  particles  from  their  initial  detonic  acceleration  to  a  fluid  regime 
more  typical  of  a  blast  wave  in  air.  High  temporal  and  spatial  resolution  multi-frame 
radiography  is  used  to  visualize  high  density  discrete  particles  moving  through  lower 
density explosive detonation products. These experiments focus on isolated particles as 
this  provides  the  simplest  possible  fluid-particle  interaction  for  a  discrete  particle 
accelerated  by  a  detonation  wave  and  its  subsequent  interaction  with  the  immediate 
detonation products. Corresponding computational analysis was conducted with discrete 
particles in coupled Cheetah - ALE3D simulations. The experiments and discrete particle 
simulations have allowed for the derivation and evaluation of particle interaction models 
that assume semi-analytic solutions for particle-interactions. Extension of these models to 
include thermal and chemical kinetic effects is recommended. 
The  analysis  of  particle 
rapidly accelerating flow fields is complicated by 
many factors. Before complicated assessments of 
fluid-particle  interactions  can  be  made  it  is 
important and useful to understand the behavior 
of  isolated  particles  under  non  steady  state 
conditions. Flash radiography is a very attractive 
experimental  technique  for  this  regime  as  it 
combines  both  high 
temporal  and  spatial 
resolution  with  the  ability  to  image  particles 
through  fluid  regimes  where  the  background 
medium  varies  in  density  from  1-2  gramscc  to 
near vacuum.  This allows one to track particles 
from when the background medium is opaque to 
when  it  becomes  visually  transparent.  These 
experiments  track  the  isolated  particles  as  they 
are  accelerated  by  a  detonation  wave  and  their 
detonation products and air. The analysis of the 
simulations  of  discrete  particles  in  coupled 
Cheetah-ALE3D12 simulations. The combination 
of  high  fidelity  material  and  hydrodynamic 
modeling will be shown to greatly facilitate the 
derivation  and  evaluation  of  particle  interaction 
models  that  assume  semi-analytic  solutions  for 
particle-interactions.  
Experimental Method 
The  experiments  consist  of  tracking  the 
evolution of  arrays  of  particles  embedded in  an 
explosive  charge.  The  evolution  of  this  charge 
after  detonation  is  tracked  by  the  experimental 
configuration shown in Figure 1 which consists 
of a rectangular array of four x-ray heads and a 
very  large  film  cassette  behind  the  charge  to 
capture the dispersion of the particles.  The area 
of  the  film  cassette  has  been  partitioned  to 
progressively  widen  the  field  of  view  as  the 
embedded  particles  disperse.  The  two  initial 
radiographs make up  the  left  third of  the  X-ray 
cassette Images 1 and 2 in Figure 1 whereas the 
final two radiographs take up the bulk of the film 
on  the  right  Images  3  and  4  This  division of 
Fig. 1. Overview of the isolated particle experiment and hexagonal embedded particle layout of experiment 
WC3.    The  radiographic  heads  were  all  100.4  inches  away  from  the  centerline  of  the  explosive  charge.   
The positions of the particles as a function of time were determined from the scaling of known fiducials 
that appear in the radiographs and located in the center plane of the charge.    Progressively larger areas of 
the radiographic image was devoted to cameras three and four to capture longer particle evolution times. 
    The  explosive  charges  consisted  of  particles 
embedded in the mid-plane of a 2-inch diameter 
by 4-inch high cylinder of LX-20 HE. Hexagonal 
and rectangular arrays of particles were used to 
create a wide range of particle-fluid interactions. 
The  rectangular  array  of  particles  used 
experiment  WC2  is  shown  below  in  Figure  2. 
LX-20  was  chosen  as  an  explosive  due  to  its 
success  in  a  prior  experimental  campaign  by 
Murphy  and  Ames3  to  diagnose  the  role  of 
atmospheric  pressure  and 
determining  particulate  arrival  times  and  shock 
wave pressures. Embedding the particulate in the 
mid-plane  of  the  charge  produced  a  simplified 
experimental geometry where the particulate only 
disperses in the radial and axial directions of the 
Fig. 2. Rectangular particle layout for WC2. 
    The list of particle arrays used in our 
experiments is given in Table 1. This unique 
configuration of 8 tests allowed us to investigate 
simultaneously the role of particle size density 
and initial position in the charge. The densities 
of the particulate were varied by using both 
tungsten W and tungsten-carbide WC 
particles. The rectangular R arrays of particles 
were stratified from top to bottom in particle 
size. The tests W2 and WC2 had rows of 
particles by radiography forced the use of the high Z 
materials  tungsten  and  tungsten  carbide.  The 
range  of  particles  sizes  used  was  chosen  in  the 
interest  of  being  able  to  discretely  resolve  the 
particle  positions.  This  limits  the  effectiveness 
of this study for smaller particle sizes. However 
particulate interacting with detonation waves and 
the  subsequent  dispersion  one  can  make  selfsimilarity arguments about them being useful for 
smaller particle sizes.  
this  was  primarily  a  study  of 
Test Configuration and Results 
The  eight experimental  charges  provide  a 
wide  variety  of  particle  densities  radii  and 
positions  within the charge. All of the tungstencarbide  WC  experiments  had  X-ray  images 
where each particles Lagrangian  trajectory was 
easily  discernable  for  long  periods  of  time.  In 
the WC3 experiment highlighted below we were 
microseconds.  However  all  of  the  tungsten 
particulate  shattered  soon  after  impact.  This  is 
also  shown  in  Figure  3  which  compares  W3 
experiment WC3 slightly later in time.   
     All  of  the  tungsten  carbide  in  Figure  3  right 
frame  is  discernable  whereas  only  the  tungsten 
particulate left frame is easily discernable above 
the detonation front.  After the detonation front 
the tungsten is discernable only as fuzzy entities. 
Fortunately the tungsten charges W3 and W4 are 
self-similar along the axial direction with respect 
to  the  detonation  front.  Hence  the  particles  at 
the  top  of  the  charge  are  equivalent  to  the 
particles  at  the  bottom  of  the  charge  earlier  in 
time.  This  indicates  that  figure  3  contains  by 
itself a fair amount of temporal information about 
Table 1. Test list and particulate loading 
particles  that  transitioned  from  small  diameters 
on  the  bottom  of  the  charge  closest  to  the 
detonator  to  large  particles  on  the  top  of  the 
charge figure 2.  The reverse stratification was 
used in tests W1 and WC1. This combination of 
tests helps differentiate the role of axial position 
in  determining  the  eventual  dispersion  of  a 
particle such as the paired set of charges W1 and 
W2.  The  remainder  of  the  charges  used  a 
hexagonal H type of layout lower right image 
shown in figure 1 which was chosen to provide 
a  high  spatial  density  of  information  for  fixed 
size  and  density  of  particulate.  The  hexagonal 
distribution has the advantages that it is very easy 
to  differentiate particles from  one  radiograph to 
the  next  and  that  radial  symmetry  effectively 
doubles the spatial density of data points.   
Another  advantage  of  the  hexagonal layout 
is  that  it  is  able  to  generate  88  distinct  particle 
trajectories  versus  only  44  trajectories  for  a 
charge that was radially symmetric. Both particle 
layouts were separated from the bottom detonator 
by one inch of explosive to allow for a relatively 
planar  detonation  wave  to  develop  before  it 
impacted the lowest level of embedded particles. 
Each  particle  layout  was  repeated  with  two 
dimension of particulate mass to particle size and 
location  to  the  study.  The  need  to  resolve  the 
volume fraction  g and density  g.  The factor 
R comes from the work done by the fluid on the 
particle and for incompressible flow has a value 
particles allow the study of these two constants. 
  Thus  experimental 
Lagrange Trajectories 
The  data  from  the  tungsten  carbide  shots 
enabled  us  to  construct  Lagrangian  trajectories 
for this analysis.  Figure 4 shows the Lagrangian 
trajectories  for  all  the  particles  in  experiment 
WC3.  Radial symmetry  was used to flatten the 
hexagonal  array  into  four  axial  rows  of  22 
particles  each.  The  diagnosed  experimental 
trajectory  for  each  row  is  depicted  using  a 
different  color. The  outline of  the  charge  is  in 
light  blue  and  the  bottom  inch  containing  no 
particles  is  also  shown.  One  feature  that  is 
easily discernable is the fact that particles on the 
edge  of  the  charge  are  accelerated  to  a  much 
larger  extent  than  those  in  the  center  of  the 
charge.  This  arises  from the  fact  that  the  outer 
particles see a much larger pressure gradient and 
much  larger  fluid  velocities  than  those  at  the 
center  of  the  charge.  The  goal  of  our  analysis 
below  is  to  use  these  Lagrangian trajectories in 
combination  with  modeling  from  ALE3D  to 
diagnose parameters of interest in validating the 
Computational Analysis 
Much of our computational analysis involved 
simulating embedded discrete particles in an ALE3D 
simulation  that  consists  of  the  LX-20  cylinder 
surrounded  by  air.  Two  analyses  are  possible.  
The  first  moves  the  particles  on  the  actual 
experimental  trajectories  and  interrogates  the 
simulation for the particulate environment.  The 
second moves particles on simulated trajectories 
and  compares  them  against  the  experimental 
  The  detonation  front 
simulations  was  calculated  as  a 
Fig.  3  the  Radiograph  The  radiograph  from 
experiment W3 left next to the radiograph from 
experiment WC3 right.  The particle numbering 
reconstruct  particle 
Simulation studies were considered for both 
fractured and intact particulate which represents 
the two post detonation configurations observed. 
Particles  can  shatter  upon  impact  with  the 
detonation wave or they can survive to be tracked 
in a Lagrangian trajectory.  For the particles that 
survived  we  were  able  to  perform  extensive 
analysis  of  their  trajectories.    This  analysis  was 
organized  around  Equation  1  that  describes  the 
This  equation  is  more  fully  documented  in 
Crowe  et.  Al  Chapter  44.  This  equation  treats 
particle  acceleration  or  deceleration  as  a 
combination  of  standard  drag  effect  that  takes 
into  account  an  empirical  relaxation 
constant    that  functions  as  an  inverse  drag 
coefficient.  The quantities in the budget are the 
particle  velocity  up  gas  velocity  ug  particle 
volume fraction p and density p and the fluid 
programmed burn based on a lighting time that 
is just the distance from the bottom center of the 
charge  to  a  desired  point  in  the  charge.  The 
detonation  velocity  of  LX-20  is  a  well-known 
quantity and the ability of ALE3D to simulate a 
simple  HE  charge  detonation  has  been  well 
Fig. 4. Reconstructed Particle Trajectories 
A unique new feature in ALE3D is the ability 
to  couple  inline  to  CHEETAH  with  conduction 
and  viscosity models in  addition  to  equilibrium 
chemistry  and  chemical  kinetics.  This  gives 
ALE3D  the  rather unique ability to  recreate the 
fluid  properties  that  surround  each  of 
particles  as  it  moves  along  its  trajectory.  The 
experimentally  diagnosed  position  of  each 
superimposed over the background fluid density 
in Figure 5 for three periods of time. 
     The  rapid  drop  in  working  fluid  density  is 
shown  in  each  frame  and  the  particles  remain 
embedded in the HE product gases for all of the 
frames  shown.  This  approach  makes  it  easy  to 
determine many of  the quantities in our  particle 
momentum  budget  and  several  other  quantities 
that  are  usually  of  interest  such  as  Reynolds 
Numbers. The time histories shown in Figure 6 for 
each  of  the  particles  indicate  a  rapid  transition 
from a high Reynolds number region to a lower 
one and that the velocity difference between the 
rapidly  decreases. 
Unfortunately  this  technique  has  difficulties 
directly  diagnosing  the  actual  terms  in  our 
momentum equation.  This difficulty arises from 
two sources of error. The first source arises from 
taking  second  differences  of 
experimental data amplifies experimental errors. 
The  second  source  arises  from  the  fact  that  we 
are  only  able  to  create  trajectories  out  of  only 
four data points.  Eliminating this second source 
of error would require several more X-ray images 
for  each  experiment.  Figure  7  shows 
diagnosed  drag  coefficient  where 
simulation  derived  quantities  are 
properties  associated  with  each  point  along  the 
trajectory.  The  very  large  values  of  the  drag 
Fig. 5. Reconstructed particle trajectories over fluid densities at 15 30 and 45 microseconds. 
coefficient at early times arise from contamination 
of  the  momentum  budget  from  inaccurately 
accounting  for  the  detonation  phase.  The  large 
values  at  the  end  of  the  experimental  time 
interval  are  due  to  the  first  source  of  error 
affecting our ability to accurately detect the slow 
acceleration of  the  particle.  There is  also some 
error due to extrapolating particle acceleration to 
the end of the time interval.  It should be noted 
that the more physically meaningful values of the 
drag coefficient occur where the temporal density 
of the data is greatest and the acceleration error 
from the detonation is no longer present. 
the optimal R value was very close to zero which 
is  probably  not  accurate.  This  anomalous  R 
value prompted us to compute a two-dimensional 
study  of  the  values  that  minimize the  quadratic 
error  between  the  experimental  and  analytic 
particles.  The  results  of  which  are  shown  in 
Figure 9.  Here  we  see that the drag coefficient 
and R are correlated with each other as shown by 
the long flat valley of minimum error.  The error 
minimum easily encompasses the 0.5 value of R 
in  the  incompressible  limit.  Fortunately  the 
minimum  errors  are  encompassed  by  drag 
coefficients between 0.4  and  0.6.  This  indicates 
that  the  drag  coefficient  of  0.5  is  indeed  a 
reasonable  value  for  use  in  more  complex 
Fig.  7.  Drag  coefficients  computed  from  the 
analysis of the 88 particles in WC3 experiment.  
The  blue  curve  is  the  mean  computed  drag 
coefficient  and  the  black  curves  is  the  median 
computed drag coefficient.   Both the mean and 
the median behavior indicates that before 10 and 
after  25  microseconds 
the  computed  drag 
coefficients deviate from a value of 0.5. 
Fig.  6. Reconstructed  Reynolds  numbers  top 
      An  alternative  analysis  of  the  momentum 
budget  can  be  obtained  from  using  analytic 
particle  trajectories  in  the  ALE3D  simulation 
The value of each term in the budget is found by 
optimizing the drag coefficient and R parameter 
to  yield  final  particle  positions  that  match  the 
experimental  data.  This  approach  suffers  from 
overly  relying  on  numerical  models  and  the 
optimal result could be arrived at by a misleading 
combination of compensating errors. The analytic 
particles  that  represent  the  optimal  fit  of  our 
to  our  experimental  data  at  60 
Fortuitously  the  optimal  drag  coefficient  from 
our simple gradient method was 0.47. However 
Fig.  8.  Comparison  of  simulated  particle 
positions  green  and  experimental  particle 
The ability of the simulated discrete particles 
to  replicate  the  observed  particle  dynamics  has 
several  important  ramifications.  Probably  the 
most important of these ramifications is that we 
can  now  derive  or  evaluate  advanced  particle 
interaction  models  that  assume  semi-analytic 
solutions  for  particle-interactions.  This  is  a 
for  extending  our 
chemical kinetic effects. 
      The use of inline Cheetah coupled to ALE3D 
provides potentially the  most accurate treatment 
of  viscosities  and  conductivities  that  go  into 
sophisticated  particle  evolution  models.  A  drag 
coefficient of 0.5 is a reasonable value to use for 
applied simulations. 
      The  authors  would  like  to  acknowledge  the 
support  from  the  following  individuals  at  the 
Lawrence  Livermore  National  Laboratory  Stan 
Ault S300 bunker team and Jason Gwo.  
      This  work  was 
DoDDOE  Munitions  Technology  Development 
Program and matching funds were provided by 
DOE.  This  work  was  performed  under  the 
auspices  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy  by 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under 
Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344. 
Fig.  9.  2-D  parameter  study  of  error  from  a 
replicated  Latin-hypercube  simulation  ensemble 
where  both  R  and  Cd  were  varied. 
horizontal axis is Cd and the vertical axis is R. 
The black dots are the positions in CdR space 
that  were  sampled.      The  colormap  shows  the 
total  summed  quadratic  error  between 
simulation  particle  position  and  the  analytic  fit 
this corresponds to an average positional error of 
1.4 cm.  The ensemble indicates the error is at a 
minimum for a drag coefficient of 0.5. 
Experimental Study on dynamic tensile properties of polymer bonded explosives 
Zhongbin Zhou Kaida Dai Jingjing Chen Yanlong Liu Pengwan Chena 
State Key Laboratory of Explosion Science and Technology 
Beijing Institute of Technology Beijing 100081 China 
In  this  work  we  utilize  a  split  Hopkinson  pressure  bar  SHPB  and  the  digital  image 
correlation DIC technique to measure the dynamic indirect tensile properties of PBXs. 
Standard Brazilian disk test and flattened Brazilian disc FBD test are used to study the 
dynamic  tensile  strength  and  FBD  test  and  semi-circular  bend  SCB  test  with  a  precrack are used to measure the dynamic fracture toughness. The dynamic displacement and 
strain fields crack propagation are measured during the dynamic deformation and fracture 
process. The effect of different pressing conditions including hot isostatic pressing hot 
molding  pressing  and  cold  molding  pressing  on  the  tensile  properties  of  PBXs  is 
discussed based on experimental results. The influence of loading rate on the strength and 
fracture toughness of PBXs is analyzed. The results show that the methods adopted in the 
experiments  effective  to  measure  the  dynamic  tensile  property  of  PBXs.  The  dynamic 
tensile strength and fracture toughness show obvious loading-rate dependence. 
Polymer-bonded explosive PBX is a highly 
particle-filled  composite  which  is  comprised  of 
90-95  by  weight  of  explosive  crystals  held 
together by a polymeric binder 5-10 by weight. 
In general the tensile strength of PBXs is much 
lower  than  the  compressive  strength  and  tensile 
failure is an important failure mode for PBXs. The 
study  of  tensile  properties  and  tensile  failure  has 
drawn  continuous  attention  among  explosive 
researchers. Low tensile strength a few MPa and 
high  brittleness  of  explosives  make  the  direct 
test  difficult  by  using  conventional 
dumbbell  specimen  especially  to  the  dynamic 
a Email pwchenbit.edu.cn 
One  of  the  most  suitable  tests  for  brittle 
materials  is  Brazilian  test  or  indirect  tensile  test. 
Brazilian test in which the disc sample was loaded 
diametrically  in  compression  can  be  used  to 
determine  the  tensile  failure  stress  of  brittle 
materials.1 In the past two decades application of 
the  Brazilian  test  to  PBX  and  its  simulants  has 
been  undertaken  by  many  authors.  Palmer  et  al 
studied  the  distribution  of  stress  failure  strength 
and  fracture  behavior  of  PBX  with  different 
compositions.2  Combining  the  scanning  electrical 
microscope  SEM  or  atomic  force  microscope 
AFM  with  some  optical  techniques  e.g.  moir 
interferometry3  4and  digital  image  correlation5-7 
the mechanical behavior and failure mechanism of 
PBX  were  measured  and  studied.  However 
considered  the  difficulty  in  preparation  of  brittle 
material  samples  some  new  sample  geometries 
and  test  method  have  been  proposed.  Several 
modified  Brazilian  test  including  FDB  test  and 
SCB test are used to determine the tensile fracture 
toughness  of  brittle  materials.8-10  Chen  et  al 
studied the tensile failure stress of PBX in quasistatic  Brazilian  test.11  The  results  show  that  the 
tensile  mechanical 
influenced by pressing pressures and temperatures.  
PBXs  behave  quite  differently  at  high  strain 
rates compared with quasi-static cases. Increasing 
the  strain  rate  strongly  affects  the  mechanical 
response  of  PBXs.    Grantham  et  al  carried  out 
dynamic  Brazilian  test  in  SHPB  to  study  the 
dynamic  mechanical  properties  of  PBX9501.12  
The tensile strains and tensile stress strain curves 
were obtained using the optical technique.  
In this paper a method combining SHPB with 
high-speed DIC technique was developed to study 
the  dynamic  tensile  behavior  of  PBX  simulants. 
Various  tensile  test  including  Brazilian  disc  test 
BDT  flattened  Brazilian  disc  FBD  test  and 
semi-circular  bend  SCB  test  were  used  to 
measure the dynamic tensile strength and fracture 
toughness.  The  effects  of  different  pressing 
techniques  on  tensile  mechanical  properties  of 
samples  were  studied.  The  influence  of  loading 
rate  on  the  strength  and  fracture  toughness  of 
A  PBX  simulant  material  was  used  in  this 
study  which  is  a  highly  particle-filled  composite 
comprised of BaNO32 particles 95 by weight 
held together by the fluoro-rubber 5 by weight. 
The  molding  powder  was  produced  by  a 
conventional  slurry  process  in  which  BaNO32 
particles  agglomerated  as  they  were  coated  with 
the binder dissolved in an organic solvent. In this 
work  the  tested  samples  were  manufactured  by 
cold  molding  pressing  hot  molding  pressing  and 
hot  isostatic  pressing  respectively.  In  the  die 
pressing the molding powder was compressed in a 
steel  die  to  produce  a  consolidated  disc  sample. 
For  cold  molding  pressing  the  pressing  pressure 
was 200 MPa the pressing temperature was 20  
and  the  duration  of  pressing  was  1  h.  For  hot 
molding  pressing  the  pressing  temperature  was 
100    the  pressing  pressure  was  200  MPa  and 
the duration of pressing was 1 h. For hot isostatic 
pressing the molding powder was firstly placed in 
a  rubber  mold  and  then  the  rubber  mold  was 
sealed  and  immersed  in  the  oil.  The  pressing 
conditions are the pressing pressure was 140 MPa 
the temperature was 100  and pressing for 4 h 
the  molding  powder  was  isostatic  compressed  to 
produce  a  large  consolidated  piece.  The  tested 
samples  with  desired  geometries  were  obtained 
through  machining.  Fig.1  shows  the  different 
Fig.1. Test samples. 
Digital image correlation DIC method 
Digital  image  correlation  DIC  method  is  a 
non-contact  optical  method  for  displacement  and 
strain measurement. This method utilizes a natural 
or  artificial  surface  speckle  pattern  as  an 
information  carrier  and  cross-correlation  function 
to  compare  images  captured  before  and  after  a 
small deformation to obtain the full-field in plane 
displacement quantitatively.13 In DIC analysis the 
correlation  coefficient  which  is  the  criterion  for 
comparing two images is given by14 
where x y and x y are Cartesian coordinates 
of a material point in the image of the undeformed 
and deformed patterns respectively. The functions 
fx  y  and  gx  y  are  light  intensities  at  that 
point in the corresponding images. The correlation 
coefficient C varies from 0 to 1 with 0 signifying 
the  coincidence  of  the  assumed  displacement  and 
strain  values  with 
the  actual  deformation 
In our work a 20 mm SHPB system was used 
in compression to perform dynamic Brazilian test. 
The  SHPB  system  was  composed  of  a  200  mm 
striker  bar  a  1800  mm  incident  bar  and  a  1500 
mm  transmitted  bar  all  made  of  aluminum.  The 
disc samples were placed between the incident and 
PHOTRON  FASTCAM  SA1.1  was  used  to 
observe the deformation and failure process of the 
sample. A quartz transducer crystal was embedded 
at  the  head  of  the  transmitted  bar  to  record  the 
transmitted wave for measuring the low amplitude 
of impact loading forces. The schematic of SHPB 
loading system was shown in Fig. 2. 
However with two parallel flats introduced to the 
disc  sample  according 
to  Griffiths  strength 
theory crack initiates in the disc center while the 
2   which is the critical condition 
for  a  valid  FBD  test.  The  tensile  failure  strength 
and  fracture  toughness  can  be  calculated  using 
finite element analysis with approximate analytical 
formulas  based  on  mechanics  of  elasticity.  The 
tensile stress is given by 
                                                        
                                                  
and the fracture toughness is determined by  
crP is  the  local  minimum  value  after  the 
critical failure load P. k and  are two coefficients 
relevant to load angle. The values of k and  can 
be obtained using numerical method. In this work 
with the loading angel 230 the corresponding 
k0.91 and 0.59 was used. 
test  was  proposed  by  Chong  and 
Kuruppu to study the fracture toughness of brittle 
materials.15 Considering  the  specimens  geometry 
as  shown  in  Fig.2  tensile  crack  model  I  is 
induced in SCB test. The fracture toughness can be 
where  maxP is  the  measured  maximum  load  a is 
the pre-fabricated crack length  KY  is a function of 
0.35 and sD0.4 with 2s is the bending span. 
.  The  method  is  valid  only  for  0.25 Da 
                     
Fig.2. Schematic of SHPB experimental setup. 
As shown in Fig.2 the BDT FBD and SCB 
tests were carried out in the SHPB. The BDT was 
applied to measure the indirect tensile strength of 
PBXs  according  to  simple  elasticity  theory  the 
tensile  stress  at  the  center  of  the  disc  is  a 
where  D and  B are  the  diameter  and  the  thickness 
FBD  test  can  be  used  to  measure  tensile 
strength and fracture toughness.10 An advantage of 
FBD  test  is  that  it  does  not  require  a  pre-notch. 
Results and discussion 
Deformation and fracture analysis  
                                                              
In dynamic Brazilian tests camera recording 
speeds  of  36000  and  100000  frames  per  second 
fps were used to record digital images with sizes 
of  384368  pixels2  and  384112  pixels2 
respectively. A subset size of 2929 pixels2 and a 
step size of 4 pixels were chosen in DIC analysis. 
By  comparing  the  digital  images  captured  after 
deformation  fields  of  samples  were  determined. 
Fig. 3 shows a sequence of images of cold molding 
pressed  PBX  undergoing  the  dynamic  Brazilian 
test.  The  overlying  arrows  shown  in  red  are 
scaled  and  can  indicate  the  direction  of  in-plane 
displacements  that  occur  from  the  start  of  the 
testing. At the moment A the sample was loaded 
in  compression  along  the  horizontal  axis.  The 
compressive  displacement  is  indicated  by  the 
direction  of  arrows  along  the  loading  line.  The 
Moment B shows the loading state prior to fracture 
tensile  displacement 
evidenced  by  the  direction  of  arrows.  The  quiver 
plot clearly shows that materials above and below 
the failures have vertically moved. At the center of 
the  disc  sample  there  is  little  motion  due  to  the 
symmetrical  nature  of  the  geometry.  At  the 
moment C it is obvious that a tensile crack opened 
up  along  the  horizontal  loading  diameter  of  the 
disc.  It  is  also  seen  from  the  quiver  plot  that  the 
materials  above  and  below  the  crack  vertically 
moved. The quiver plot results show that the disc 
sample  fractured  under 
tensile  stress  action 
exhibiting an obvious splitting failure.  
A                                                B                                                   C 
Fig. 3. The displacement vector fields of cold molding pressed PBX at different moments under Brazilian 
Fig. 4. The tensile strain fields of cold molding pressed PBX at different moments under Brazilian test. 
A                                                B                                                   C 
From  displacement  data  strain  fields  can  be 
determined  by  fitting  in  both  the  x-  and  ydirections. Fig. 4 shows the tensile strain field of 
cold  molding  pressed  PBX  at  three  loading 
moments.  At  the  moment  A  concentrated  strain 
bands  mainly  generate  at  the  contact  points 
between the disc and both bars. These are caused 
by  concentrated  stress  at  the  contact  points.  In 
following  moments  it  can  be  observed  that  the 
localized  deformation  has  emerged  along  the 
loading  diameter.  With  the  increase  of  impact 
loading  force  at  the  moment  C  the  localized 
deformation  became  more  profound  along  the 
loading diameter and the concentrated strain band 
has extended and propagated nearly over the whole 
fraction  of  the  diameter.  The  tensile  strain  value 
also  increases  with  increasing  of  external  force. 
The  similar  results  such  as  the  quiver  plots  of 
displacement  and  distribution  of  strains  are  also 
presented in hot die pressed PBX and hot isostatic 
PBX.  The  disc  samples  fractured  under  tensile 
stress action and the fracture route was along the 
loading  diameter.  The  distribution  of  strain  fullfield obviously shows the nonuniform deformation 
Dynamic tensile strength 
A  typical  loading  curve  of  hot  isostatic 
pressed  PBX  in  FBD  disc  samples  is  shown  in 
Fig.5. Initially loading force increases slowly and 
shows  a  slight  nonlinear  and  then  increases 
rapidly and linearly to the peak value Pmax which 
corresponds  to  the  initiation  of  a  central  crack  in 
accompanying with the growth of crack. When the 
load  reaches  the  gentle  slope  zone  the  load 
decreases  slowly.  It  is  assumed  that  the  fracture 
occurred  and  the  corresponding  loading  value  is 
marked  Pcr  in  Fig.5.  Finally  the  semi-circular 
shaped  discs  crushed  and  the  load  decreased  to 
Fig.5. A typical loading curve of hot isostatic 
pressed PBX in FBD samples. 
Substituting  the  maximum  load 
Eq. 2 and Eq. 3 the tensile strength at the disc 
center  in  BDT  and  FBD  test  can  be  calculated 
respectively.  Fig.6  shows  the  relation  between 
tensile  strength  and  loading  rate.  The  tensile 
failure strength increases linearly with the loading 
rate.  Hot  molding  pressed  PBX  exhibits  similar 
tensile  failure  strength  with  hot  isostatic  pressed 
PBX and a larger tensile failure strength than cold 
molding  pressed  PBX  showing  that  the  pressing 
temperature  have  a  greater  influence  on  dynamic 
tensile  mechanical  properties  of  PBXs 
pressing  pressure.  It  is  reasonable  to  assume  that 
the  better  binder  softening  with  the  increasing  of 
pressing  temperature  can  produce  better  coating 
quality  and  interfacial  bonding.  For  the  same 
explosive  samples  the  measured  strength  values 
from FBD test are higher than those from Brazilian 
test. This can be explained based on decreasing of 
stress  concentration  at  the  loading  boundary  in 
Fig.6. Variation of failure strength with different 
FIG.7. Dynamic fracture toughness as a function 
Based  on  measured 
crP of  FBD  sample  and
toughness  of  materials  can  be  calculated  using    
Eq.  4  and  Eq.  5  respectively.  The  calculated 
results  with  respect  to  different  loading  rates  are 
shown  in  Fig.7.  The  fracture  loading  rate  is 
determined  from  the  slope  of  the  linear  loading 
curve before fracture initiation. Just like the tensile 
increases  linearly  with  the  loading  rate  showing 
experimental results show that the FBD and SCB 
tests  are  valid  to  determine  the  dynamic  fracture 
toughness  exhibiting  good  consistency  in 
We  use  a  SHPB  testing  system  and  highspeed  DIC  technique  to  measure  the  dynamic 
tensile  mechanical  properties  of  PBX  simulants. 
The displacement and strain fields were measured 
using  DIC  method.  The  fracture  route  was 
observed  near  the  center  of  sample  along  the 
loading  direction.  The  dynamic  tensile  strength 
and  failure  strain  was determined using BDT and 
FBD  tests.  The  results  show  dynamic  tensile 
strength of studied PBX simulants exhibit loading 
rate  dependent.  The  effect  of  different  pressing 
conditions  was  studied.  The  tensile  mechanical 
properties  are  influence  by  pressing  pressure  and 
temperature.  The  pressing 
temperature  has  a 
greater  influence  on  mechanical  properties  of 
toughness  obtained  by  FBD  and  SCB 
increase with the loading rate.  
than  pressing  pressure.  The 
This  work  was  supported  by  the  National 
Natural  Science  Foundation  of  China  Grant  No. 
10832003  11221202  and11076032.  The  authors 
thank Professor Fude Nie of Institute of Chemical 
Materials  Chinese  Physical  Academy 
providing  PBX  mock  materials.  The  authors  also 
thank Professor Fangyun Lu and Dr. Rong Chen of 
National University of Defense Technology China 
for providing assistance in the SHPB tests. Binder Mixing and Concentration Variation in TATB Polymer-Bound Explosives 
Trevor M. Willey Lisa Lauderbach Franco Gagliardi and George Overturf  
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94550 
A survey of various lots of TATB 135-tri-amino-246- tri-nitrobenzene mixed with 57.5 Kel-F 800 binder reveals a lot-dependent variation in how homogenously the binder 
mixes with the explosive in pressed materials.  Monochromatic x-ray microtomography 
quantitatively reveals the microstructure and volume constituent concentrations and thus 
the extent of binderTATB mixing variation.  The technique outlined here is particularly 
applicable  to  explosive-binder  mixtures  where  the  explosive  and  binder  possess 
dramatically  different  attenuation  coefficients  for  example  when  the  binder  contains 
higher atomic weight elements e.g. Cl or is of a dramatically different density.   
TATB   1 3 5 -  tri-amino-  2 4 6 -  trinitrobenzene  is  a  highly  insensitive  energetic 
material  often  mixed  with  polymer  binders1  to 
improve  mechanical  properties 
formulations  LX-17  and  PBX-9502  use  Kel-F 
800  poly  chlorotrifluoroethylene-co-vinylidene 
fluoride  as  a binder with nominal  concentrations 
investigated  with  tomography  were  previously 
concentration  of  about  1.5  on  mm 
scales2  3  with  binder-rich  regions  surrounding 
binder poor regions.  The so-called prill structure 
is  consistent  with 
explosives where mm-sized spheres or prills form 
during the mixing of binder and explosive prior to 
the  formulation  of 
This  observation  motivates 
questions    What  is  the  cause  of  this  variation?  
Does  it  result  purely  from  the  formulation  step?  
How  does  the  production  lot  of  TATB  or  Kel-F 
800  contribute  to  the  degree  of  heterogeneity?  
Can  homogeneous  LX-17  andor  PBX-9502  be 
reliably synthesized?  And ultimately what are the 
possible  impacts  of  heterogeneity  if  any  on 
mechanical  and  detonation  properties?    These 
questions beyond the scope of this paper cannot 
the  degree  of  microstructural 
The  goals  of  this  paper  are  thus  to 
quantitatively  characterize  TATB    Kel-F  800 
the  utility  of  synchrotron-based 
computed tomography to quantitatively determine 
composition  of  3D  volumes  in  explosive-binder 
this  end  synchrotron-based 
tomography was performed on over 50 samples of 
LX-17  and  PBX-9502  with  different 
pressings  and  ages  represented    a  starting  point 
towards answering the above questions.  The data 
which is directly importable andor comparable to 
modeling  could  also  give 
explosivebinder  heterogeneity  affects  mechanical 
andor detonation properties. 
function  of  energy  enable  volume 
linear  relationships 
resultant  measured  cid2020 
determination  of  constituent  volume  fractions 
voxel  by  voxel  in  three-dimensional  volumes  of 
explosive-binder  mixtures  like  LX-17  and  PBX9502.    Using  monochromatic  incident  x-rays  the 
well-defined  well-known  and  energy  dependent 
reconstructed  slices.    As  an  example  at  20  keV 
TATB and Kel-F 800 have attenuation coefficients 
of 1.1 and 4.1 cm-1 respectively at 30 keV these 
are  0.5  and  1.4  cm-1.    In  the  simple  case  of  a 
mixture  of  two  materials  e.g.  TATB  and  Kel-F 
attenuation  coefficients  cid20204  can  be  directly 
800  these  differences  and  nonlinearity  in cid2020  as  a 
cid1848cid3021cid3002cid3021cid3003cid2020cid3021cid3002cid3021cid3003cid1848cid3012cid3032cid3039cid3007cid2020cid3012cid3032cid3039cid3007cid2020cid3040cid3032cid3028cid3046cid3048cid3045cid3032cid3031  at  two 
energies  and cid1848cid3021cid3002cid3021cid3003cid1848cid3012cid3032cid3039cid3007cid1848cid3049cid3042cid3036cid30311.    This 
can  be  extended  to  N  materials  including  void 
requiring  N-1  acquisitions  each  at  a  unique 
energy.    At  length  scales  presented  void  volume 
generally is less than a few percent and varies little 
with  a  slight  increase  with  decreasing  binder 
concentration 2 3.  The voxel size used is larger 
than the expected TATB crystallite sizes and thus 
each  voxel  should 
represent  a  macroscopic 
volume i.e. each voxel volume should encompass 
a  number  of  TATB  crystallites  with  associated 
binder  and  void  whereas  at  much  smaller  length 
scales  one  might  expect  a  voxel  of  one  material 
concentration can also be estimated from a single 
energy acquisition by assuming a void distribution 
as a function of cid2020.   
acquisitions  that  show  void  volume  tracks  mildly 
with  TATB  volume  concentration  and  inversely 
with  Kel-F  800  concentration  coupled  with  the 
small  change  in  void  volume  0.1  over  twice 
the  fwhm  of  the  distribution  in  voxel  linear 
attenuation coefficients we chose a distribution of 
void matching this criteria.  Over the vast majority 
of  voxels  this  is  essentially  a  linear  relationship.  
Also  at  the  extremes  one  would  expect  void 
distribution in the extreme case to approach 100 
as  approaches zero and void volume to approach 
Figure 1  Comparison between derivation of KelF 800 concentration deviation from nominal from 
single acquisitions 20 keV  30 keV vs. dual 
energy with no assumption on void distribution.  
Top panes present slices mid-pane Kel-F 800 
concentration vs. 20 keV attenuation coefficient 
and histograms from the single-energy 20 keV 
acquisition vs. the dual energy method. 
0  at  large  .    A  rotated  hyperbola  fits  these 
criteria  and  was  used  for  the  single  energy 
The  differences  between  single  and  dual 
energy  scans  are  presented  in  Fig.  1.    The  upper 
right and upper middle panes present slices at 71.2 
Figure 2  Slices depicting deviation from nominal Kel-F 800 concentration derived from x-ray computed 
tomography.  Different batches lots of LX-17 are presented on the top row and of PBX-9502 on the 
micron  resolution  of  the  deviation  from  the 
nominal  Kel-F  800  concentration  7.5  by 
weight  using  the  single-energy  approach  at  20 
keV  and  30  keV  respectively.    The  upper  right 
concentration derived from both the 20 and 30 keV 
acquisitions  using 
presented  above  and  not  assuming  a  void 
  The  multi-energy  slice  clearly 
possesses the lowest signal to noise of the series 
followed by the 30 keV scan.  The lower signal to 
noise  of  the  30  keV  scan  is  expected  due  to  the 
high and non-optimal  50 transmission at this 
energy.  Errors from both the 20keV and 30 keV 
scans  contribute  to  the  multi-energy  slice  the 
middle  and  lower  panes  estimate  this  error.    The 
middle pane presents the Kel-F concentrations for 
each of the 105 voxels in this particular volume 
plotted  vs.  its  attenuation  coefficient  at  20  keV.  
The blue points lie on a single curve as expected 
while  the  concentrations  for  the  multi-energy  are 
distributed red points.  Plotting the distribution of 
the  difference  between  the  multi-  and  20  keV 
concentration leads to a Gaussian distribution with 
fwhm of 0.9.  Conversely a similar calculation 
with the 30 keV data vs. the 20 keV data gives a 
Gaussian with fwhm of 0.4 a measure of error 
between  these  two  as  the  single-energy  scans 
would be expected to give nearly identical results.  
Although  the  multi-energy  data  is  more  accurate 
this is eclipsed by its lack of precision minimally 
0.4  at  these  length  scales  and  acquisition 
parameters.    Perhaps  the  most  interesting  trend 
arises  from  simply  the  visual  inspection  of  the 
  The  blue  20  keV  computed  slope 
underestimates  the  approximate  slope  of  the  red 
multi-energy  data  and  thus  indicates  the  singleenergy  approximation 
underestimates the degree of inhomogeneity.  The 
bottom  pane  plots  the  histogram  of  Kel-F  800 
volume  concentration  for  the  20  keV  single 
energy  and  multi-energy  data.    Both  show  a 
double  peak  structure  reminiscent  of  early  CT 
work  on  LX-17  distinguishing  a  binder-rich  prill 
boundary  region  and  a  binder-poor  prill  interior.  
The  multi-energy  peaks  are  somewhat  broader 
than the single at least 0.4 is random errors as 
described above.  The similar shape and broadness 
indicates  that  the  single-energy  method  is  a 
reasonable  approximation  to  obtain  Kel-F  800 
concentrations in these explosives. 
Figure  2  presents 
approximate Kel-F 800 concentration from within 
the  interior  of  LX-17  and  PBX-9502  samples  of 
Figure 3  Histograms of the deviation in Kel-F 800 concentration from nominal. 
different  manufacturing  lots  labeled  a  through  p.  
The  variation  in  Kel-F  800  concentration  is  only 
dependent  upon  lot  Several  samples  from  within 
inhomogeneity  irrespective  of  conditioning  i.e. 
temperature cycling5 age or mechanical creep. 
LX-17 lots a and b are most homogeneous c and g 
are moderately homogeneous and d e f and h are 
heterogeneous.    PBX-9502  lots  are  moderately 
homogeneous  with  lots  m  and  n  being  most 
heterogeneity  is  purely  lot-dependent  the  most 
apparent  predictor  of  inhomogeneity  to  date  is 
whether dry-aminated or wet-aminated TATB was 
used  in  the  formulation.    Brown  letters  in  Fig.  2 
e.g.  LX-17  lots  a  and  b  indicate  formulations 
using dry-aminated TATB while black e.g. PBX9502  lots  m  and  n  are  made  with  wet-aminated 
TATB.    The  dry-aminated  lots  lead  to  slices  that 
are  qualitatively  more  homogeneous  than  wetaminated  from  inspection  of  the  slices  in  Fig.1.  
Conversely  lots  made  with  wet-aminated  TATB 
have prill boundaries this observation is supported 
by  the  histogram  data  of  Fig.  3.    Wet  aminated 
TATB  leads  to  broader  asymmetric  and  often 
bimodal histograms.  No wet-aminated histograms 
are as narrow as dry-aminated for LX-17 and the 
wet-aminated  histograms  of  lots  m  and  n  are  the 
only  peaks  exhibiting  bimodal  structure  in  the 
Although the use of wet- vs. dry-aminated 
TATB  is  the  most  apparent  factor  influencing 
degree of inhomogeneity the TATB type is not the 
only parameter and may even be coincidental with 
other  process  changes.    The  variation  observed 
within  the  lots  formulated  with  wet-aminated 
binderTATB  mixing.    The  microstructure  varies 
from  grossly  heterogeneous  in  e  to  relatively 
homogeneous  in  g.    The  histogram  from  g 
however  is  still  broader  than  the  LX-17  formed 
with dry aminated TATB. 
These data will also be interesting starting 
points  to  compare  mechanical  and  detonation Carbon condensation in detonation of high explosives
Konstantin A. Ten Vladimir M. Titov Eduard R. Pruuel Alexey O. Kashkarov Boris P. Tolochko
Yury A. Aminov Boris G. Loboyko Alexandr K. Muzyrya and Ewgeny B. Smirnov
Lavrentiev Institute of Hydrodynamics Novosibirsk Russia
Institute of Solid State Chemistry and Mechanochemistry Novosibirsk Russia
Russian Federal Nuclear Center All-Russian Research Institute of Technical Physics Snezhinsk Russia
Novosibirsk State University Novosibirsk Russia
Abstract.This paper presents experimental data on monitoring of condensed carbon
nanoparticle sizes in detonation of oxygen-decient high explosives HEs. The nanoparticle sizes were derived from processing of measured distributions of small-angle X-ray
scattering SAXS. The work was carried out at the accelerator complex VEPP-3 BINP.
The measured sizes of carbon nanoparticles are  2 nm in TATB and up to 3-5 nm in BTF
in the chemical reaction zone. Carbon nanoparticles of maximum size are found beyond
the chemical reaction zone and are as large as  3 nm in TATB and its mixtures with
octogene HMX and  70 nm in BTF. The measured nanoparticle sizes coincide with
the dimensions of nanodiamonds extracted from saved products of detonation soot of
explosive charges of similar size and composition which were exploded in an ice shell.
The studies of carbon condensation in detonation of oxygen-decient HEs were initiated at The
Lavrentiev Institue of Hydrodynamics LIH in
1983 in the context of works on synthesis of detonation nanodiamonds. These works were actively
carried on at many centers. Now there are over 800
papers on the subject in the world 1 2. The weight
of explosive charges under study was 200 grams to
several hundred kilograms their diameter was 40
mm and more. It was mostly the saved detonation
products soot collected after explosion in explosion chamber that was investigated in these works.
Equipment of that time did not allowed investigation into the kinetics of carbon condensation and
therefore the time and place of condensation were
considered to coincide with the chemical reaction
zone because the medium parameters there corresponded to the stable phase of diamond.
in this work increased due to
the expansion of studies of 135-triamino-246trinitrobenzene TATB at nuclear research centers
in the USA and Russia in the mid 90s. The measured velocities of plates thrown using TATB were
in better agreement with calculations if the energy
release continued behind the detonation front. Calculations showed that the total time of carbon condensation by an order of magnitude exceeded the
time of existence of the chemical reaction zone 3 4.
In the early 2000s researchers in Novosibirsk began developing a new technique to study fast processes using high-energy accelerators. The high
intensity of synchrotron radiation SR allowed
Fig. 1. Growth of the nanoparticle size in detonation
of BTF TNT TNTRDX and TATB against time.
The particle sizes are shown on a logarithmic scale.
recording the dynamics of diffractive scattering distribution with an exposure of 1 ns 5 6 7 8 9. The
intensity of small-angle X-ray scattering SAXS
to uctuations of electron density which is in connection with carbon condensation in detonation of oxygen-decient high explosives. Simulation calculations showed that the measured distributions of small-angle X-ray scattering
SAXS could be used for derivation of information
about the size of carbon nanoparticles that condense
in the chemical reaction zone and beyond it 6 7 8 9.
This paper presents experimental data from a
study of dynamics of carbon condensation in new
compounds based on TATB as well as benzotrifuroxan C6N6O6 BTF a hydrogen-free HE. A
study of TNT and a TNTRDX mixture was carried out for comparison. The explosive charges in
these experiments were of identical geometric dimensions. The experimental assemblies were also
of equal dimensions for ensuring identity of the
spread of detonation products. Besides all the
explosive charges were small diameter 20 mm
length 30 mm weight  20 grams while the literature offers data only for large charges 1 2. For
the sake of comparison charges of the same HEs of
the same size were exploded in an ice shell in explosion chamber and the explosion products were
saved. The soot was analyzed using microscopic
and diffraction techniques.
Fig. 2. Nanoparticle size dependence on time in detonation of TATB  HMX mixture.
SAXS measurement experiments and their results
The SAXS measurements were carried out on
VEPP-3 beam line 0. The experimental set-up is
described in 7 8 9. SAXS pulse duration 1 ns
was recorded with detector DIMEX-3 with an angular resolution of 104 rad 10 located in 1 m from
The pressed samples of explosives made of TATB
and its mixtures with HMX and ultradispersed diamond UDD as well as the samples of trinitrotoluene TNT and its mixtures with RDX were of
one size diameter 20 mm length 30 mm. As for
hydrogen-free HEs benzotrifuroxan BTF was investigated. The charges were pressed up to 95 of
their maximum density.
The recorded SAXS distributions for mixtures
of TATB and TNT were processed in the Guinier
approximation11 12. The intensity Iq R has the
scattering for spherical particles
is the wave vector in which
2 is the scattering angle and  is the wavelength
R is the particle radius. Fig. 1 shows the resulting nanoparticle size dependence on time for TATB
TNT TNTRDX and BTF. At the initial moment
zero in the X axis corresponds to the detonation
Fig. 3. Nanoparticle size distributions in the BTF
detonation front. The error is highlighted red.
Fig. 4. Nanoparticle size distributions behind the
BTF detonation front 3 microseconds after.
front the nanoparticle size ranges from 1.5 nm in
TATB to 3 nm in BTF. Derived from the scattering
measured beyond the detonation front 3 s later
the maximum particle size is  2 nm in TATB 4
nm in TNT 5 nm in TNTRDX and 70 nm in BTF.
In the TATBHMX 5050 mixture g. 2 the maximum particle size was  3.5 nm.
The recorded sizes of scattering nanoparticles in
TATB and its mixtures with HMX were much less
than those in TNT and its mixtures with RDX.
In detonation of BTF the SAXS distribution measured can be processed with the software code
GNOM13 because the SAXS signal amplitude in
BTF is 4 times higher than that in TNT. The obtained nanoparticle size distributions are shown in
g. 3 and g. 4. The gures present the relative
numbers of particles of a certain size in relation to
the total number of particles at any given time. In
the detonation front the size distribution peak falls
on 3 nm and in 3 s it moves to 30 nm.
Saved explosion products
We also conducted experiments to analyze the
saved detonation products of identical explosive
charges. The charges were exploded in an ice shell
in a hermetic stainless steel explosion chamber. The
charge weight was  20 g its diameter and length
were 20 mm and 30 mm correspondingly. The ice
mass and diameter were 2000 g and 100 mm. The
explosions were initiated using ten powder in a case
made of TNTRDX 5050 alloy. After explosion the
chamber was washed with water and combustion
products were merged into a vessel. After evaporation of water there was black slime left so called
soot explosion products.
The resulting products were subjected to microscopic and diffraction examination. Nanodiamonds
were isolated from the soot in a conventional way 
acid treatment and blowing with hot gas mixture
of oxygen and high purity nitrogen of a predetermined temperature. The gas at the exit was analyzed
with XRF spectrograph for the presence of carbon
combustion products. When CO and CO2 were no
longer detected the soot was analyzed using microscope and diffractometer and then the gas temperature was increased by another 50 C. After heating
up to 520 C there were only nanodiamonds left in
the soot. The maximum size of the nanodiamonds
was  5 nm in the TNT products  4 nm in the
TNTRDX 5050 products and  2 nm at the limit
of resolution in the TATB products.
A photo of BTF soot after heating up to 420 C
is shown in Fig. 7. One can see four types of formations in the photo. Zone 1 amorphous carbon with
inherent globe structure the particle sizes are 100 to
1000 nm. Zone 2 impurity particles. They consist
mainly of Fe-O. Zone 3 carbon modication nanodiamond small particles. The characteristic size
is 2 to 10 nm. Zone 4 carbon modication nanodiamond large particles. These attened-shape
Fig. 5. Carbon nanoparticles in TATB detonation
Fig. 6. Carbon nanoparticles in BTF detonation
Fig. 7. BTF detonation products after heating up to
particles are 20 to 100 nm in size.
After heating up to 520 C there were only nanodiamonds left in the BTF soot Fig. 8. The obtained distributions of nanodiamond sizes in the
studied HEs coincide with the distributions obtained in dynamic experiments from SAXS measurements.
Our experiments have a characteristic feature of
the small size of the explosive charges diameter of
20 mm and weight of  20 g. The nanodiamond
sizes of  4-5 nm in TNT and TNTRDX 5050 are
nevertheless in agreement with the literature data.
Fig. 8. Diffraction pattern of BTF detonation products after heating up to 420 C.
From the SAXS data on TATB and in the saved
TABT products the nanoparticle size is  2 nm
which is at the limit of resolutions of both the methods. Adding RDX in TNT leads to a marked increase in the yield of nanodiamonds1 2 in case of
TATB adding HMX has little effect on the size of
resulting nanodiamonds. Perhaps in this size about
the limit diameter the condensation is incomplete
although measurements of detonation parameters in
the same TATB dimensions gave the same parameters as for large charges7. In 14 there were nanodiamonds of  3-4 nm found in the TATB detonation
products of 40 mm in diameter. That is this HE
demonstrates a full-scale effect which requires further study.
Large sizes of nanodiamonds in BTF were rst
In the present paper the size distribution of nanodiamonds was obtained for the rst
time. The large size of nanodiamonds is probably greatly inuenced by the higher temperature in
the detonation front although the temperature measured in the BTF detonation front  4100 C 16
turned out to be less than expected. It is the duration
of this temperature  1 s that is more important.
It exceeds the chemical reaction zone by far. Since
there is no hydrogen in BTF the process of nanodiamond synthesis goes without intermediate radicals
C-H which usually slow down nanodiamond synthesis in conventional HEs.Study of Coupling Electrical Energy to Detonation Reaction Zone of 
Thuvan Piehler Charles Hummer Richard Benjamin Kevin McNesby 
US Army Research Laboratory 
Aberdeen Proving Ground Maryland 21005 USA 
Aberdeen Proving Ground Maryland 21005 USA 
Abstract. It is anticipated that the introduction of high currents will increase the energy 
content  of  the  combustion  gases  in  the  vicinity  of  the  detonation  front  through  ohmic 
heating.  This  increased  energy  should  then  lead  to  either  an  increase  in  the  detonation 
velocity or an alteration of a critical thickness of an explosive. The approach is to transfer 
the  stored  electrical  energy  from  a  160-kJ  5.5-kV  capacitor  bank  into  the  conductive 
zone behind the detonation front of an explosive reaction. The power supply employs a 
6.5-kV  0.010-F  200-kJ  capacitor  bank.  The  explosive  portion  of  the  experimental 
apparatus  consists  of  two  copper  plates  2.54  cm  wide    50  cm  long    1.27  cm  thick 
separated by a varied thickness layer  of Primasheet-1000 explosive. Upon initiation of 
the Primasheet-1000 sheets an explosive  switch allows the energy  stored in the pulsed 
power  assembly  to  be  transferred  through  the  copper  plates  and  into  the  conducting 
reaction  zone  of  the  detonation  front.  Advanced  diagnostics  are  used  to  image  the 
advancing detonation front and to measure detonation velocity. Initial results  show that 
there was a difference of 4.2 in the detonation velocity observed in 0.1-cm-thick layers 
and 2.6 in 0.2-cm-thick layers of Primasheet-1000 while inputting the electric energy 
into the reaction zone. No detonation velocity enhancement was observed in 0.3-cm-thick 
layers of Primasheet-1000 explosive.  The accuracy limits in our measurements suggest 
but do not prove that electrical energy caused the detonation velocity enhancement. Ongoing  efforts  are  to  observe  the  effects  of  electrical  energy  to  the  alteration  of  critical 
thickness of TNT sheets. 
The reaction zone between the shock front and the 
Chapman-Jouguet  plane 
detonating explosive is an electrical conductor 1. 
The gaseous detonation products and the unreacted 
explosive  are  insulators.  If  an  electric  field  E 
applies to a high explosive then current flows only 
in  the  reaction  zone  which  is  less  than  0.1  mm 
the  subsequent  electrical  power  Pelec
deposited  per  unit  area  in  the  high  explosive  is 
the  electrical  conductivityis 
effective  conduction  zone  width  and  E is  the 
applied electric field. 
the  possibility  of 
If the electrical power employed is large 1015
Wm2  the  resulting  improvements  in  explosive 
performance might be significant 1.  Lee et al 2 
detonation properties by supplying electric energy 
into  a  detonating  explosive.  They  observed  an 
enhancement  up  to  3  of  detonation  velocity 
when  electric  energy  equivalent  to  5  of  the 
explosive chemical energy was supplied.  
The objective of this research effort is to assess 
the  possibility  of  using  electrical  energy  to  either 
enhance the detonation velocity of an explosive or 
alter  the  critical  thickness  property  of  sheet 
All experiments were conducted at an indoor 
facility.  The  actual  experimental  arrangement  is 
shown  in  Figure  1.    Figure  2  illustrates  the  highvoltage  power  supply  enclosed  in  a  wooden  box 
used in the experiment.  
Circuit control units
thick  and  55  kJ  of  energy  is  transferred  from  a 
capacitor to a 22-H inductor. 
Circuit control unit
Figure 2 Capacitor bank with thyristor and circuit 
control.  The  high-voltage  capacitor  charging 
supply is not shown. 
When  the  detonation  front  comes  between  the 
copper  plates  an  explosively  opening  switch  is 
ruptured  and  the  energy  stored  in  the  inductor  is 
rapidly  transferred  through  the  copper  plates  and 
into the conducting reaction zone of the detonation 
front. An optical fiber system shown in Figure 4 
was  designed  and  built  in  house  to  determine  the 
detonation  velocity  of  Primasheet-1000  in  highly 
electrically charged environments. Using the time 
of arrival for the evenly spaced fibers captured by 
incremental  detonation 
velocities were determined. After each test several 
feet of each fiber were damaged. The fibers were 
then  trimmed  cleaved  visually  inspected  by 
passing light through the fibers and reused for the 
next  experiments.  The  Cordin  Model  132B 
Synchronous  streak  camera  Cordin  Company 
Salt  Lake  City  UT  was  used  to  record  the 
detonation  front.  The  streak  camera  has  a  slit 
width of 0.6 mm and a maximum writing speed up 
to 20 mms. The high-speed video camera images 
were  captured  with  a  resolution  of  512    128 
pixels  using  Photron  FASTCAM  SA5  high-speed 
camera  Photron  USA  Inc.  San  Diego  CA.The 
camera frame rate was 100000 frames per second 
with an exposure time of 370 ns. 
Figure1. Experimental arrangement a outside the 
blast chamber and b inside the blast chamber 
The  experimental  arrangement  of  electrical 
energy  coupling  with  explosive  rails  shown  in 
Figure 3 included two copper plates separated by a 
0.3-cm  layer  of  Primasheet-1000  explosive.  The 
plates were 2.54 cm wide  50 cm long  1.27 cm 
Copper plates 2.54 cm wide by 
50 cm long  by 1.27 cm thick
Sheet explosive50 cm long by 2.54 cm 
wide various thickness
Figure 3.Electrical energy coupling with explosive 
Figure  4.  a  Side  and  b  top  view  of  eightchannel optical fiber system. 
Figure  5  shows  a  series  of  high-speed  digital 
initiation  of  1-mm-thick 
Primasheet-1000 without  high-voltage  electrical 
input. Figure 6 shows a series of high-speed digital 
images of 1-mm-thick Primasheet-1000 with highvoltage electrical input. Figures 5a and 6a show 
an  initial  flash  from  the  onset  of  detonation.  As 
shown in figure 6c and 6d the upper edge and 
lower edge of the Primasheet-1000 show a brighter 
leading  luminous  trace  compared  to  the  leading 
edges  of  Primasheet-1000  in  figure  5c  and  5d 
when there was no high-voltage electrical input. It 
is presumed that the luminosity happened due to 
explosivecopper  interface  rather  than  a  highvoltage discharge spark. The random nature of this 
phenomenon contributes to errors in analyzing the 
streak  camera  records  for  deriving  the  detonation 
Figure  7  shows  a  typical  streak  camera  record  in 
which the maximum available energy in the circuit 
is  deposited  in  the  explosive.    The  reference 
detonation  velocity  was  measured 
different  explosive  thickness  testing  in  the  same 
setup only without supplying electric energy.  
Figure  5.  High  speed  digital  images  following 
initiation of 1 mm thick Primasheet-1000 without 
high voltage electrical input at a 0 b 0.00001 c 
0.00002  d  0.00003  e  0.00004  second  after 
Figure  6.  High  speed  digital  images  following 
initiation of 1 mm thick Primasheet-1000 without 
high voltage electrical input at a 0 b 0.00001 c 
0.00002  d  0.00003  e  0.00004  second  after 
Table  1.  Detonation  velocity  of  Primasheet-1000
without wo and with w high-voltage electrical 
Detonation velocity measured from
streak camera record  mms
95 Confidence Intervals
Detonation velocity measured from 
optical fiber record mms
95 Confidence Intervals
Figure  8  is  the  section  of  the  current  traces  in 
figure 9 between 600 and 780 s.  In this  figure 
there  is  a  small  noise  pulse  at  650  s  when  the 
detonation circuit delivered a current pulse to  the 
blasting  cap.    The  slope  of  the  current  doesnt 
change indicating that the resistance of the circuit 
has  not  changed.    This  is  the  time  when  the 
blasting  cap  is  detonating  a  booster  charge  and 
when  the  25-mm-wide  EOS  is  being  opened  by 
explosive  between  the  rails.    The  slope  of  the 
current  does  noticeably  change  at  about  667  s 
indicating  that  the  resistance  of  the  circuit  has 
increased.  This additional resistance is due to the 
detonation front between the rails which lasts until 
about 734 s when there is a small noise pulse and 
a  change  in  the  slope  of  the  current.    When  the 
detonation front reaches the end of the rails there 
is still about 30.3 kJ of energy left in the inductor 
that must be dissipated by forming a discharge arc 
through the air that has a larger resistance.  Given 
the  detonation  velocity  of  7  mms  that  was 
measured by the  streak camera and the light pipe 
data the time for the detonation front to travel the 
length  of  the  rails  508  mm  is  about  73  s.  
Subtracting this time from the 734 s the time that 
the  detonation  front  should  start  at  about  661  s 
which is consistent with the change in the slope at 
Figure 7.  A typical streak record with an electric 
energy input of 160.33 kJ. 
 A  velocity  difference  determined  from  the  fiber 
Primasheet-1000  based  on  6  repeated  tests  and 
1.2 for 2-mm-thick Primasheet-1000 based on 4 
repeated  tests.  On  the  other  hand  the  velocity 
difference rate from the streak camera records was 
Primasheet-1000  and  2.7 
Primasheet-1000 shown in table 1. The reported 
percent of  velocity difference is  the best estimate 
for the detonation velocity enhancement. There are 
some  uncertainties  of  the  detonation  velocity 
enhancement  due  to  the  fact  the  baseline  of 
detonation  velocity  was  measured  only  one  time. 
The  confidence  interval  for  detonation  velocity 
measurements without high voltage input was not 
determined.  Assuming  a  like  or  slightly  larger 
confidence interval as the high voltage input case 
would  mean  for  both  cases 
intervals would overlap. The results suggest but do 
detonation  velocity.  The  average  value  measured 
suggests  no  enhancement  however  the  large 
confidence  interval  1.02  mms  means  that  an 
enhancement might have occurred.  It is noted that 
the  energy  input  is  the  energy  stored  in  the 
the  3-mm-thick  high  voltage 
the  energy  delivered 
that  high  voltage 
an  accurate  and  reliable  current  data  for  analysis 
as  well  as  required  to  prove  that  the  input  of 
electrical  energy  causes  an  enhancement 
detonation velocity. 
Detonation ends 734 sTwo-Dimensional Detonation Propagation using Shock-Fitting
Christopher M. Romick and Tariq D. Aslam
 Weapons Experiments Division Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos New Mexico 87545 USA
Abstract. A highly accurate numerical shock-tting scheme composed of fth order spatial
and third order temporal discretizations was applied to the two-dimensional reactive Euler
equations for several models with single-step irreversible kinetics in a slab geometry. The
rst case examined was for a calorically perfect mixture of ideal gases with a prescribed
material interface motion. The steady detonation phase speed that results from this scheme
was compared with the equivalent from shock-capturing. It was found that the errors while
using shock-tting at the coarser solutions were signicantly reduced in comparison with
shock-capturing. Furthermore for an error on the order of 10 ms which is similar to that
observed in experiments shock-tting offers a computational savings on the order of 1000.
Additionally the behavior of the detonation phase speed was examined for several slab
widths while utilizing the Wescott-Stewart-Davis WSD model which is commonly used
high explosive HE modeling to evaluate the detonation performance of PBX 9501. It was
found that the thickness effect curve resulting from this equation of state and reaction model
using published values is dramatically more steep than observed in recent experiments.
However adjusting the reaction rate parameters improves the correlation of the model to
experimental results. Moreover similar results are predicted when the shock-tting scheme
is used to examine rate stick behavior of the steady detonation phase speed in PBX 9501.
Insensitive high explosives IHE
9502 have many benets1 however these IHEs exhibit longer reaction zones than more conventional
high explosives CHE. This has the effect of making them less ideal explosives and thus more susceptible to edge effects. These effects can lead
to considerable performance degradation including the detonation speed being affected in large regions. Aslam et al.2 showed that in order to obtain O50 ms error in the steady propagating detonation speed using an essentially non-oscillatory
ENO in combination with Lax-Friedrichs LF
shock-capturing that a minimum of 50 points were
needed in the reaction zone. This becomes prohibitively more computationally intensive as the requested error on the detonation velocity is reduced.
Additionally many constructions used in reactive
HE modeling e.g. WSD3 SURF4 CREST5 employ the shock-state in the reaction rates.
common practice of shock-capturing the shock is
smoothed at the expense of thickening its width.
Thus this induces an ambiguity of what is the actual
shock-state. To remove this ambiguity shock-tting
can be used where one of the boundary conditions
is the shocked state at the detonation front. Furthermore using shock-tting restores the potential for
highly accurate solutions as it effectively separates
the ambient upstream and smooth reactive ow behind the front.
The rest of the paper is laid out as follows. First
the computational algorithm is outlined with the
governing equations and associated jump conditions
presented initially followed by the transformation
to the computational domain. This is accompanied by the numerical scheme which is presented
with special care near the edges of the HE. This
is followed by a comparison of the steady detonation phase speed between shock-tting and shockcapturing in a slab geometry for a calorically perfect mixture of ideal gases previously examined by
Aslam et al.2 It was found that the required resolution in the reaction zone of an HE for a given error in
the steady detonation phase speed can be much less
if shock-tting is used. Then the shock-tting algorithm was used to evaluate detonation performance
in slabs of various thickness utilizing the more realistic WSD equation of state model for PBX 9501. It
was found that the published values by Lambert et
al.6 for this model produce a thickness curve effect
that is steeper than that observed in experiments.
Additionally a second set of parameters was examined and predicted a thickness effect curve closer
to the experimental data. Furthermore the shocktting method was used to predict a diameter effect
curve for PBX 9501 with both sets of parameters in
In this section the governing equations and numerical implementation for two-dimensional shocktting with deected material interfaces is presented
and is an extension of the work of Henrick7.
The two-dimensional unsteady reactive Euler
equations which undergo a single reaction are expressed in conservative form as
Fig. 1. Two-dimensional slab geometry with the
detonation traveling upwards and x  0 marks the
plane of symmetry. The black curve denotes the
sonic locus in the HE the white line denotes the
HE and inert conner interface.
to complete the system a model for the reaction rate
R and equation of state which relates internal energy e density  pressure p and the single reaction progress variable  must be specied. Here
the reaction progress variable goes from zero unreacted to one fully reacted. Equations 1-5 are
supplemented by the Rankine-Hugoniot conditions
s uNs  DN   0 uN0  DN  
where DN is the normal shock speed uN  uT the
normal and tangent velocity respectively. The subscripts s and 0 denote the shock and ambient states
respectively. Therefore the shock state can be determined from the ambient state and the shock velocity which consists of the normal shock speed
For the shock-tting numerical scheme equations 1-5 are transformed to a frame that is xed to
the shock front. Moreover the problem of interest
here is a slab geometry. As shown in gure 1 after the detonation passes the reactants transition to
products followed by a signicant expansion wave.
This expansion in turn slows the normal detonation
speed at the edge causing curvature at the front.
Thus the material interfaces must be transformed
as well this means that three dynamic surfaces must
be t the shock and the two material interfaces.
Here the transformation used is
g is the Jacobian of the transformation
In order to reduce the computational complexity of the problem being examined here the material interfaces follow a prescribed motion.
Initially they are parallel with the ow and eventually deect to an angle corresponding to near the
maximum streamline deection of a single oblique
shock. This angle corresponds to an unconned slab
test and can be calculated by a shock polar analysis
as shown by Aslam et al.8
Therefore the only remaining surface that must
be t is the shock locus zs. Additionally the remaining metrics needed to complete the transformation are zs
 . The shock locus can be
described as level curve such that
where l  xl 0 0    r  xr 0 0 
zs    denes the shock locus and xl xr are the
left and right boundaries respectively. This transformation relates z and  linearly offsetting them
by the z position of the shock. Additionally it
uniformly distributes the x positional coordinates
along lines of constant . Therefore the shape of
the shocked HE region is simply a rectangle in the
transformed reference frame.
Noting that equations 1-5 can be written in the
then in the transformed reference frame the governing equations can be written as
Therefore the rate of change of such a curve is
Likewise if the shock locus is a continuous curve it
can be written down as a function of the jump at the
cid6cid6cid6cid6cid6cid6
By making use of the transformation
equation 19 can be rewritten for the rate of change
of the shock locus zs
cid6cid6cid6cid6cid6cid6
Since the jump condition for each conserved
quantity is equivalent one may choose any of the
jump conditions. In this work energy has been chosen. Furthermore from these jump conditions the
normal detonation speed DN  can be calculated as
cid6cid6cid6cid6cid6cid6cid6cid6
Now by differentiating equation 21 with respect to  an evolution equation for the shock slope
cid6cid6cid6cid6cid6cid6
Therefore all the metrics can be calculated given
the ow variables and the initial shock slope shape.
Thus given an equation of state the evolution of the
shocked reactive ow can be examined.
Numerical Implementation
A method of lines approach was used which allows for separate spatial and temporal discretizations to be used and allows for easy inclusion of
source terms. Therefore equations 16 and 23
can be evaluated easily. Additionally the location
of the front at the centerline using equation 21 is
also integrated. The remaining front locations are
constructed for plotting results using a second order
trapezoidal method and the shock slope.
A uniform Cartesian grid in the transformed
space is used to discretize the spatial domain. N1
equally spaced points are used for   l r . Likewise in the  direction N 1 equally spaced points
The spatial discretization of ux derivatives
was accomplished using a combination of LaxFriedrichs and WENO5M nite difference scheme
with special considerations near the shock and material interfaces in a similar manner to Henrick et
al.9 Near the shock front N  2 N  1 N 
the ux derivatives in the  direction h
culated at the ith point in the  direction using
 8h i N  3  8h i N  1
 6h i N  3  18h i N  2
10h i N  1  3h i N  Ocid16
 75h i N  4  200h i N  3
 300h i N  2  300h i N  1
Additionally at the shock the state variables are
given from the shock jump relations equations 610 after the shock speed has been calculated from
equation 22. Likewise near the material interfaces special considerations must be made for the
ux derivatives in the  direction h
purposes and thus allowing the material interfaces
to be deected to an angle slightly past the maximum streamline deection angle lower order approximations were used. At the material interfaces
rst order one-sided differences were used the next
two neighboring points i.e. i  1 2 for the material
interface at i  0 used the standard second-order
central difference scheme. Also along these interfaces the velocity is enforced to be tangent to the
At the rear boundary a zero gradient condition is
As the steady state phase speed is the main
quantity examined in the present study temporal
integration was accomplished using a third order
Runge-Kutta scheme10. The temporal discretization was dictated by convection with the smallest
time step in either direction being multiplied by a
CFL number of 0.4 to compensate for the multidimensionality of the problem. The results were
veried to be insensitive to small changes in CFL.
Two separate models for the equation of state
were examined. The rst model presented utilized
the ideal gas law which is a case previously examined with shock-capturing by Aslam et al.2. Then a
model utilizing the wide-ranging equation of state
better known as the WSD model is also presented.
All shock-tting calculations were initialized using
the one-dimensional ZND prole at DCJ .
In addition to the ideal gas assumption the model
presented by Aslam et al.2 made use of calorically perfect gases with identical specic heats and
molecular masses. Therefore the equation of state
can be written down as
where  is the ratio of specic heats and q the heat
release of the reaction. Additionally the reaction
rate dened for this model was
where k is a rate pre-multiplier  the reaction dependence on the reaction progress N the pressure
dependence of reaction and pCJ the pressure at the
Chapman-Jouguet point. The following model parameters were originally chosen to weakly mimic
PBX 9502   3 q  4 mm2s2 0 
2 mgmm3 p0  104 GPa k  1.2936 s1
  12 and N  2. With this choice of parameters the Chapman-Jouguet detonation speed
and pressure are DCJ  8.00 mms and pCJ 
32.0 GPa respectively. Moreover the total reaction
zone length is  4 mm and the ZND solution is very
near the strong shock limit.
As the concern is for the steady phase speed
of the detonation in unconned charges the maximum sonic angle at the edge must be applied.
it can be calculated explicitly in the strong shock limit e 
this equation of state
. This maximum sonic angle has associated with it a streamline
deection angle e  19.5
Recall that in the shock-tting case the material
interfaces follow a prescribed motion from parallel
to the initial ow to a deection corresponding to
this maximum streamline deection angle. Thus in
the shock-tting cases the material interface locations take the form
where m is the slope corresponding the deection angle ai the polynomial constants and c
a time constant. By choosing a6  462 a7 
1980 a8  3465 a9  3080 a10  1386 and
a11  252 gives a material interface deection that is smooth and ves times smoothly differentiable in . For the case presented here m 
The case examined was for a slab thickness of
48 mm and a convergence study was performed examining the steady detonation phase speed. In order to reduce the computational cost only half of
the domain was modeled as the problem is symmetric in nature. In both the shock-tting and shockcapturing cases the computational domain was 
10 mm long moving with the detonation.
Figure 2 shows the centerline normal detonation speed versus time for several resolutions using
shock-tting. The solid black curve is the coarsest
resolution at     12 mm even at this
resolution the time dependence quickly relaxes to a
steady state of DN  6.987 mms. At the next
resolution of     14 mm dark gray
dashed line it relaxes to DN  6.902 mms.
Likewise the light gray dotted curve which corresponds to     18 mm relaxes to
The phase speed D0 given by the shock-tting
algorithm for the centerline solid black curve
edgematerial interface dark gray dashed curve
Fig. 2. The normal detonation speed from the
shock-tting algorithm in a 48 mm thick slab for the
model utilizing the ideal gas assumption for three
Fig. 3. The detonation phase speed in a 48 mm thick
slab for the model utilizing shock-tting in the ideal
gas model for three locations.
Fig. 4. The predicted steady prole for the sonic parameter in a 48 mm thick slab for the model utilizing
the ideal gas assumption with shock-tting with at
a resolution of 18 mm. The sonic locus denoted by
and midspan light gray dotted curve versus time
at a resolution     18 mm is shown
in gure 3. As the material interface is deected
explicitly it is the rst to slow from DCJ  this is
followed by the midspan phase velocity slowing.
Lastly the centerline begins to slow. It is clear that
all three phase speeds relax to the same value of
D0  6.905 mms at nearly the same time. This
indicates that the detonation has relaxed to a steady
An example of this steady wave produced using
shock-tting at a resolution of 18 mm is shown
in gure 4 for the sonic parameter. As the deection is symmetric only half the thickness is shown.
The sonic locus where the velocity in the shockattached frame equals the sound speed is illustrated
by the thick black curve. Near the material interface the sonic locus curves towards the shock front
intersecting the material interface right at the shock
indicating that the detonation is unconned.
Figure 5 shows the steady detonation phase speed
for both shock-tting and the shock-capturing at
various resolutions. The shock-capturing study employed a very compressible conner with 0 
2 mgmm3 and   1.4 and utilized a Ghost
Fluid Method to treat multi-material interaction as
presented by Fedkiw et al.11 and a second-order
minmod spatial scheme. Each case was run for
100 s. The values presented for shock-capturing
gray curve were averaged over the width of the
computational domain and the nal 4 half-thickness
of the domain i.e. 96 mm. Likewise for the shocktting cases black curves the steady detonation
phase speed is averaged over the nal 10 s.
The shock-capturing values gray curve start at
D0  6.693 mms for a resolution of 12 mm.
At the nest resolution examined of 1128 mm
the steady detonation phase speed predicted by
shock-capturing was 6.904 mms. Both of the
cases are presented for shock-tting which correspond to forcing the deection of the material interface to angles of 19.5 black curve with lled
squares and 19.6 black curve with open circles
are much more accurate even at the coarsest resolution with a steady detonation phase speed of
D0  6.897 mms and D0  6.896 mms respectively. The two solutions for shock-tting essentially lie on top of one another. Moreover the
Fig. 5. Convergence study of the steady detonation phase speed for a 48 mm thick slab for
the model utilizing the ideal gas assumption for
both shock-capturing gray curve and shock-tting
shock-tting values have a much atter slope under
resolution indicating that for a specic error tolerance much less resolution is needed in the shocktting case.
Table 1 shows the averaged values for the different cases examined. The shock-capturing scheme is
converging to an innite resolution steady detonation phase speed of 6.909145  0.004858 mms.
This approximation is a simple extrapolation from
the nest two grid assuming rst order convergence.
This is the best that could be expected due to the
smearing of the shock. The shock-tting scheme
is much more accurate at a given resolution as the
method does not smear the shock. At the higher
resolutions the shock-tting case likely begins to
show the effects error building up along the material interfaces due to the lower order approximations used. As such the innite resolution approximations have been made using the resolutions of
116 and 132. It should be noted that while still
converging deecting the material interface past
the maximum streamline deection angle admitted
by the equation of state gives a slightly lower predicted innite resolution steady detonation phase
speed of 6.906940  0.0004405 mms compared
to 6.9073879 0.0004250 mms. Moreover both
of the shock-tting cases are within the error predicted by the shock-capturing scheme suggesting
that both methods are converging towards the same
steady detonation phase speed.
The second case examined using the shock-tting
scheme was for a more realistic and complex equation of state given by the WSD model for PBX
9501. The reaction rate is given the same form
as equation 29. However the values for ambient state and reaction rate parameters are given by
Lambert et al.6 as 0  1.844 mgmm3 p0 
0 GPa k  110 s1   0.93 N  3.5
and PCJ  36.3 GPa. This yields a steady half
reaction zone length at DCJ of  7 m and full
reaction zone of  500 m. It should be noted
that this ambient density yields a Chapman-Jouguet
detonation speed of DCJ  8.860 mms which
is moderately higher than observed in experiments
of DCJ  8.80 mms however this is partially due to the ambient density also being moderately higher than that usually measured at 0 
1.836 mgmm3. Though even at this lower density
the predicted Chapman-Jouguet detonation speed
is  8.840 mms therefore as the DCJ is still
the study was conducted using 0 
The maximum streamline deection angle was
calculated for this model for a phase velocity of
DCJ to be  12.1 from a shock polar analysis in
a similar manner to that of Aslam et al.8 Thus the
angle to which the material interface must be deected is minimally 12.1 to study the unconned
slab geometry behavior. The prescribed motion of
the material interface follows the same form as used
in the previous study except m  0.215 which corresponds to a deection angle just beyond 12.1
Moreover the reaction rate is faster than the previous case examined the time constant used in this
Figure 6 shows the detonation phase speed along
the centerline of the slab versus time for several
thicknesses at resolution of 5 m. At a slab thickness of 8 mm black solid line the detonation phase
speed is only slightly retarded from DCJ and relaxes to D0  8.843 mms. For the thinner slabs
the detonation phase speed is reduced further from
DCJ with slab thicknesses of 4 mm dark gray
solid line and 2 mm light gray solid line relax to
D0  8.764 mms and D0  8.568 mms respectively. Below a critical thickness the detonation
Table 1. Steady Phase Speed Convergence
Shock-Fitting e  19.5
Shock-Fitting e  19.6
6.9073879  0.0004250

6.906940  0.0004405
Fig. 6. The detonation phase speed for the model
utilizing N  3.5 and WSD equation of state for
four slab thicknesses predicted by the shock-tting
fails an example of which is shown for a slab width
of 1 mm dashed black line.
By examining several more thickness a thickness effect curve can be created and is shown in gure 7a dashed gray line with open squares. Additionally the experimental data taken from Jackson and Short12 black curve with lled squares
are presented as well. It is clear that model strongly
over predicts the effect of slab thickness. The widest
slabs having signicantly higher phase speeds predicted versus those observed. Additionally the detonation fails near a slab width of  1.2 mm for
this model which is larger than that observed in
experiment. This may be expected as this model
was calibrated using Pop-plot data. While examining whether this predicted behavior persisted at
ner resolutions it was found that under resolution
the model begins to develop oscillations likely indi
387
cating an instability under resolution similar to that
predicted by Short et al.13
Through private communication with B. Wescott
a second model was suggested for the reaction rate
parameters such that k  106.2 s1   0.7
and N  2. Using these parameters the steady half
reaction zone length at DCJ becomes  13 m.
Also the full reaction zone length shortens signicantly to  130 m. However using these reaction
parameters the model was found to be stable under
resolution unlike the previous reaction rate model.
The centerline detonation phase speed for several
resolutions is shown in gure 8 for slab thickness
of 1.5 mm to illustrate this fact. The solid black
line is at a resolution of 10 m which relaxes to
D0  8.57310 mms. Likewise at resolutions of
5 m dashed dark gray line 2.5 m dashed light
gray line and 1.25 m dotted dark gray line relax
to D0  8.57343 mms D0  8.57344 mms
and D0  8.57345 mms respectively.
In gure 7a the the thickness effect curve for
the new reaction model is also shown for 10 m
and 5 m resolutions given by the light gray lines
with open circles and triangles respectively. Both of
these curves lie nearly on top of each other. This
new model extends the range over which the detonation persists by a signicant range. However the
model still over predicts the phase speed in wide
slabs and under predicts the speed in the narrower
slabs. Though it should also be noted that it has reduced the stiffness in the curve when comparing to
the model making use of N  3.5.
Additionally this shock-tting method can also
be applied to rate sticks by adding a source term to
each of the reactive Euler equations. Moreover the
Fig. 7. a Thickness effect curve for both models utilizing the WSD equation of state predicted by shocktting and experimental data and b diameter effect curve for both models utilizing the WSD equation of
state predicted by shock-tting and experimental t.
Fig. 8. The detonation phase speed in 1.5 mm thick
slab for the model utilizing N  2 and WSD equation of state for four resolutions.
predicted diameter effect curve for a resolution of
5 m is shown in gure 7b for both of the PBX
9501 models previously examined in the slab geometry. The experimental t taken from Campbell
and Engelke14 is shown by the thick black line. The
dashed part of the line is conjectural according to
the authors based on the similarity between PBX
9501 and PBX 9404. The model utilizing N  3.5
is once again shown by the dashed gray line with
open squares whereas the model utilizing N  2 is
shown by the light gray line with open circles. As
with the thickness effect curve both models over
predict the steady phase speed at wider diameters
and under predict it at the smaller diameters but
the N  2 case is much closer to the empirical t
shown. However it does not curve as sharply and
thus the detonation persists at smaller diameters in
the model then the conjectured curve predicts.
An investigation of the simple ideal gas model
using shock-tting coupled with the high order discretization scheme yielded highly accurate solution
for the steady detonation phase speed even at coarse
In fact at the coarsest resolution examined in this study the steady detonation phase
speed was within 12 ms of the converged predicted value whereas the shock-capturing analog
was more than 200 ms away from the predicted
converged value. This loss in accuracy at a given
grid resolution for shock-capturing versus shocktting is due both the smearing of the shock and
the ambiguity of the shock state. Therefore for certain specialized problems this technique offers gains
in accuracy at signicantly lower necessary resolutions.
In this particular case for a error within
10 ms shock-tting offers a computational savings
of  16  16  16  4096.
Additionally the shock-tting algorithm was applied to examine the steady detonation phase speed
behavior as a function slab width while using the
WSD equation of state for PBX 9501. It was found
that the reaction rate parameters for PBX 9501 published demonstrate a stiffer thickness effect than
that observed in experiments. Moreover these rate
parameters appear to be unstable under resolution.
7. Henrick A. K. Shock-tted numerical solutions of one-and two-dimensional detonation
Ph.D. thesis University of Notre Dame 2008.
8. Aslam T. D. and Bdzil J. B. Numerical and
Theoretical Investigations on Detonation-Inert
Connement Interactions Twelfth Symposium
Intl on Detonation pp. 483488 2002.
9. Henrick A. K. Aslam T. D. and Powers J. M.
Simulations of Pulsating One-Dimensional
Detonations with True Fifth Order Accuracy
Journal of Computational Physics Vol. 213
10. Macdonald C. B. Constructing highorder
RungeKutta methods with embedded strong
stabilitypreserving pairs Masters thesis Simon Fraser University 2003.
11. Fedkiw R. P. Aslam T. D. Merriman B.
and Osher S. A non-oscillatory Eulerian approach to interfaces in multimaterial ows the
ghost uid method Journal of Computational
Physics Vol. 152 pp. 457492 1999.
12. Jackson S. I. and Short M. Experimental
measurement of the scaling of the diameter-and
thickness-effect curves for ideal
and non-ideal explosives Journal of Physics
Conference Series Vol. 500 p. 052020 2014.
13. Short M. Anguelova I. I. Aslam T. D. Bdzil
J. B. Henrick A. K. and Sharpe G. J. Stability of Detonations for an Idealized CondensedPhase Model Journal of Fluid Mechanics
Vol. 595 pp. 4582 2008.
14. Campbell A. W. and Engelke R. Diameter
Effect in High-Density Heterogeneous Explosives Sixth Symposium Intl on Detonation
Using a set of modied reaction rate parameters
yields a more resilient detonation propagation process with the failure occurring near a thickness of
0.5 mm. However the model still over predicts the
phase speed in wide slabs and under predicts the
speed in the narrower slabs. The relative behavior
when comparing to the experimental t persists for
both sets of parameters in rate sticks as well.
This study was performed under the auspices of
the US Department of Energy. The authors thank
B. L. Wescott for sharing an updated set of reaction
Model of Conductivity Profiles in TNT Detonations 
Allen L. Kuhl1 Daniel A. White1 Kaushik Balakrishnan2 John B. Bell2  Vincent E. Beckner2 
1 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
7000 East Avenue Livermore California USA 94551  
1 Cyclotron Road Berkeley California USA 94720 
2Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
Abstract.  An  analytic  model  of  the  conductivity  profile  behind  a  detonation  wave  is 
described. The model has three components i a thermodynamic model based on the 
Cheetah code ii a similarity solution for the detonation wave and iii a conductivity 
function that depends on the local temperature and graphite concentration. Model results 
agree  qualitatively  with  Ershovs  measurement  of  the  conductivity  profile  in  a  TNT 
detonation. It is shown that such conductivity waves produce electro-magnetic waves that 
radiate from the explosion. 
That  detonation  products  from  condensed 
explosives  can  be  electrically  conductive  was 
pointed out by Melvin Cook in his monograph  
The  Science  of  High  Explosives1  published  in 
1958.  In  the  following  year  he  studied  the 
propagation  of  detonation-generated  plasmas 
into the surrounding atmosphere 2. In 1959 Brish 
et  al.  3  reported  high  values  of  electrical  conductivity  in  TNT  and  lead  azide  detonation 
products density of  1 gcc and discussed the 
role of free carbon in this phenomenon. In the 
4th  Detonation  Symposium  of  1967  Hayes  4 
reported  conductivity-history  measurements  in 
detonation products cylindrical charges of Comp 
B d  3.8 cm L  30 cm.  
 More  recently  Ershov  56  measured  the 
conductivity profile behind the detonation front 
in TNT. A schematic of the experiment is shown 
in Figure 1. A copper cylinder od  4 cm id  b 
 1 cm was packed with TNT a 2-mm-diameter 
                                                 
 Though published after Cook this work was actually 
done  in  1947so  Russian  science  attributes  the 
discovery of electrical conductivity of TNT to Brish. 
copper  wire    a  was  located  on  the  centerline. 
The  conductivity  of  the  detonation  products 
between  the  copper  wire  and  copper  wall  was 
measured a peak conductivity of  23 mhocm 
was recorded see Fig. 2. 
Fig 1. Schematic of the Ershov experiment 5. 
Proposed  here  is  an  analytic  model  of  the 
electron conductivity profiles generated in TNT 
detonations. The model has three components  
  i thermodynamic states within the detonation 
 ii  similarity  solution  for  a  constant-velocity 
iii electron-conductivity model based on the 
temperature  and  carbon  graphite 
wave as predicted by the Cheetah code 
Here  we  use  the  phase  plane  method  as 
modified  by  Kuhl  to  apply  to  constant-velocity 
Chapman-Jouguet CJ detonations in condensed 
phase charges 11. The non-dimensional flow field 
thermodynamic  variables  and  velocity 
U  u uCJ   are  presented  in  Fig.  4  for  planar 
cylindrical and spherical detonations in TNT.  
Fig.  3.  Non-dimensional  relationship  between 
thermodynamic variables along the CJ isentrope 
 SCJ 1.58cal  g  K  for TNT. 
Fig.  4.  Similarity  solution  for  planar  j    0 
cylindrical j  1 and spherical j  1 ChapmanJouguet detonation waves in TNT by Kuhl 11.  
Fig. 2. Conductivity profile in TNT detonation 
products at t  3.8 s. 
Thermodynamic States 
The  starting  point  in  the  analysis  is  the 
Chapmann-Jouguet  CJ  state  for  TNT  as 
predicted by the Cheetah code 7 TCJ  3238 K  
  eCJ 1354  calg pCJ 
Then the thermodynamic states along the CJ 
expansion isentrope where computed by Cheetah. 
Results  are  shown  in  Fig.  3  as  variables  nondimensionalized  by  their  CJ  value    T TCJ  
density  R   CJ   energy  E  e  eCJ   sound 
2   pressure  P  p  pCJ  and 
isentropic gamma G    CJ . 
Similarity Solution 
A  similarity  solution  for  detonation  waves 
was first described by Sir G. I. Taylor 8 in 1941. 
This  similarity  approach  was  formalized  as  the 
Phase Space Method by Academician Sedov in 
1958  in  his  monograph  Similarity  and  Dimenin  Mechanics  9.  Similarity 
popularity  in  modeling  explosions  in  gases
rather than solids. Oppenheim et al.  10 used the 
Phase  Space  Method  to  derive  all  possible 
solutions bounded by a strong detonation.  
The  species  profiles  for  a  spherical  detonation 
wave  are  depicted 
preponderance of carbon graphite 19 moleskg 
compared to other species.  
charge  radius  Rc  5.25 cm .  Subsequently  the 
detonation  products  expand  sending  a  strong 
rarefaction  towards  the  origin  which  quenches 
the conductivity of the products curves 5-10.  
Expansion of the detonation products creates 
a  strong  shock  in  the  air.  The  corresponding 
conductivity wave 13 in the air is also depicted in 
Fig. 6 as the blue curves 5-10. 
Electromagnetic Waves 
The  radial  expansion  of  the  conductivity 
wave in the earths magnetic field  B0  creates an 
azimuthal current according to Ohms Law 
This  current  acts  as  a  source  generating 
electromagnetic  waves.  The 
Greens  function  approach  1415  can  be  used  to 
predict electric and magnetic waves in space and 
time. The Greens function takes the form 
where  U  is  the  Heaviside  function 
derivative  of  the  Dirac  delta  function  R  is  the 
R  xobs xs  and  is retarded time   tobs ts . 
The electric field strength is calculated from the 
One can think of this as a generalization of the 
Biot-Savart Law to include causality effects in 
time. Given E the magnetic field strength H is 
then  calculated  from  the  integral  of  Faradays 
See White and Fasenfest 14 for more details. 
Using  the  conductivity  waves  of  Fig.  6  as 
sources the predicted magnetic fields are shown 
in Fig. 7. The Ershov effect red curves and the 
Boronin effect 16 blue curves appear as separate 
and  distinct  waves.  Because  of  the  source 
Fig.  5.  Species  profiles  within  a  spherical 
detonation wave in a TNT charge by Kuhl 11. 
The  anomalously  high  conductivity  behind 
the  detonation  wave 
existence  of  a  special  conduction  mechanism. 
Erhsov 5 suggests it is due to thermal emissions 
from  carbon  particles 
detonation  of  TNT.  Hayes  4  proposes  that  the 
carbon particles form a crystal lattice of graphite 
electrons may move from one particle to another 
under  a  potential  barrier.  Here  we  use  an 
Arrhenius-type model of Pietronero et al. 12 with 
an  activation  energy  value  recommended  by 
Ershov5.  Conductivity  is  proportional  to  the 
number of carbon atoms per unit volume from 
Cheetah and depends exponentially on 1T. The 
model details are described in Appendix A. 
The  aforementioned  model  was  used  to 
predict the conductivity profile behind a planar 
detonation  in  TNT.  Results  are  compared  with 
Ershovs  measurement  in  Fig.  2.  The  predicted 
profile is in qualitative agreement with the data 
for the considered experiment 5. 
The  conductivity  wave  in  a  spherical  TNT 
detonation  is  presented  in  Fig.  6.  Time  t    0 
corresponds to the initiation of detonation at r  
0.  At  t    7.29 s   the  detonation  reaches  the 
symmetry only  Ez  and H y  waves are created all other fields are zero. 
Fig. 6. Conductivity wave in a spherical TNT chargeErshov effect red curves and in the shock-heated 
air of the ensuing blast waveBoronin effect blue curves. 
Fig. 7.  Ez and H y  fields from the Ershov red curves and Boronin blue curves effects at 10 m from a 1 
kg TNT charge detonation in the earths magnetic field Kuhl et al 13.
It  has  been  known  for  more  that  50  years 
that  the  detonation  products  from  condensed 
explosives  can  be  electrically  conductive.  This 
has  been  shown  by  conductivity  measurements 
within  the  detonation  wave  by  Brish  Cook 
Hayes  Ershov  and  others.  This  paper  proposes 
an  analytic  model  of  such  conductivity  waves 
based  on  i  Thermodynamics  of  the  DP  gases 
from the Cheetah code ii a similarity solution 
for the detonation wave and iii a conductivity 
model that depends on the local temperature and 
graphite concentration.  
is  presented.  Model 
A solution for a planar conductivity wave in 
qualitatively  with 
the  conductivity  profile 
measured  by  Ershov  but  the  model  should  be 
checked against conductivity measurements from 
other  explosives  e.g.  Comp  B  PETN  etc.  to 
determine  the  domain  of  applicability  of  the 
A  solution  for  the  conductivity  wave  in  a 
spherical  TNT  charge  is  also  presented.  Using 
the  time-domain  Greens  function  method  it  is 
this  conductivity  wave  creates 
electromagnetic  waves  that  radiate  from  the 
This work performed under the auspices of 
the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy  by  Lawrence 
Livermore  National  Laboratory  under  Contract 
DE-AC52-07NA27344.  LLNL-CONF-645176. 
The  authors  would 
constructive  comments  by  A.  P.  Ershov  which 
improved the manuscript. Influence of window characteristics on chemical reaction zone measurements in 
Dana M. Dattelbaum Richard L. Gustavsen Tariq Aslam Stephen A. Sheffield and E. Bruce Orler 
Shock and Detonation Physics Mailstop P952 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 
Department of Chemistry Virginia Tech Blacksburg VA 24601 
Abstract.  The  chemical  reaction  zone CRZ  describes  the  spatial  and  temporal  region 
behind a detonation front over which explosive reactants are converted to products by 
exothermic decomposition reactions and the flow is subsonic.  The CRZ is characteristic 
to  each  explosives  chemical  composition  and  decomposition  reaction  rates  and  can 
vary  from  10s  of  ns  e.g.  conventional  high  explosives  behind  the  front  to  smm  for 
non-ideal  formulations  e.g.  ammonium  nitrate-fuel  oil.  The  CRZ  is  often  measured 
using  optical  velocimetry  techniques  at  a  windowed  interface  the  window  affects  the 
reaction zone dynamics due to wave interactions at the interface. PBX 9502 is a plasticbonded high explosive of 95 123-triamino-246-trinitrobenzene TATB and 5 KelF 800 polymer binder.  In this paper we describe the evaluation of Kel-F 800 as a novel 
shock impedance-matched window to PBX 9502 and provide a preliminary estimate of 
its optical window correction at 532 and 1550 nm.  The window corrections were found to 
be small a  1.013  0.034 at 532 nm a  1.010  0.003 at 1550 nm similar to 
PMMA.  The CRZ of PBX 9502 was measured at LiF PMMA and Kel-F 800 windows.  
A  two-step  reaction  previously  observed  at  LiF  is  also  observed  with  Kel-F  800  and 
indicates that reaction occurs over fast and slow regions with tfast  22  5 ns and tslow  
detonating  explosives  is  defined  by  the  leading 
inert shock front which compresses the explosive 
to  the  von  Neumann  vN  spike  condition  on  the 
unreacted Hugoniot and the Chapman-Jouget CJ 
Zeldovichvon  NeumannDoering 
ZND  1dimensional theory of detonation Fig. 1.12 The CJ 
locus is a unique condition as it is the tangent of 
the  steady  detonation  Rayleigh  line  with  the 
product Hugoniot with D  u  c D is the steady 
detonation  velocity  u  is  the  mass  or  particle 
velocity c is the sound velocity at pressure.  For 
ideal  explosives  it  is  assumed  that  chemical 
equilibrium is reached at the CJ locus in which the 
exothermic  decomposition 
into  a  dense  fluidcarbon  product 
mixture  are  complete.    However  for  carbon-rich 
explosives such as those based on 123-triamino246246-trinitrobenzene 
conjectured  to  occur  both  within  and  temporally 
beyond the CJ plane leading to discontinuities in 
the  release  isentropes  shift  in  the  CJ  condition 
with time s due to the additional energy release 
associated with carbon coagulation and therefore 
uncertainties in the products Hugoniot.3-6  
TNT  carbon  coagulation 
impedance  match  to  both  the  inert  explosive 
unreacted Hugoniot and its detonation products.  
While  this  is  not  feasible  in  practice  a  window 
material  that  is  a  close  match  to  the  unreacted 
Hugoniot would offer improvements toward nearin  situ  measurements  of  the  chemical  reaction 
zone.  Kel-F  800  is  high  density      2  gcm3 
copolymer comprised of 25 mol polyvinylidene 
polychlorotrifluoroethylene  PCTFE  and  is  the 
binder  in  Department  of  Energy  insensitive  high 
explosives  based  on  TATB  PBX  9502  95 
TATB 5 Kel-F 800 LX-17 92.5 TATB 7.5 
Kel-F 800.13 It is known that the PCTFE segments 
crystallize forming physical crosslinking sites that 
affect  mechanical  properties 
including  moduli  yield 
properties. The  crystallinity in Kel-F 800 is low 
  0-15  and  as  such  the  polymer  can  be 
prepared  to  be  optically  transparent  unlike  more 
promising  window  material  as  its  Hugoniot  is  a 
close impedance match to the PBX 9502 unreacted 
Hugoniot and other high density explosives.    
Chemical reaction zone dynamics in PBX 9502 
fluoropolymers.  Kel-F  800 
Several  earlier  works  have  investigated  the 
reactive flow characteristics of the CRZ of TATBbased  explosives.  Sheffield  Bloomquist  and 
Tarver14  provided  estimates  of  the  reaction  zone 
length of PBX 9502 of CRZ  270 ns or 2.1 mm 
with vN and CJ conditions of 37.5 and 28.5 GPa 
respectively  by  analysis  of  sub-ns 
resolution particle velocity wave profiles measured 
at H2O windows and a Jones-Wilkens-Lee product 
equation  of  state.  Wescott  Stewart  and  Davis 
WSD8 similarly estimated a reaction zone width 
of  2.9  mm  from  reactive  burn  calibration.  More 
recently  Gustavsen  et  al.15  estimated  a  reaction 
zone of 6.3 mm at -55  oC which is in agreement 
with  Aslam  and  Hills  temperature  dependent 
diameter  effect  data16  and  Seitzs  earlier  results 
using  LiF  windows.17-18  Bouyer  et  al.19-20 
examined  a  related  TATB-based  explosive  using 
VISAR  and  heterodyne  velocimetry  HV  at  LiF 
windows  confirming  the  fast  decrease  in  particle 
velocity  of  over    10  ns  followed  by  a  slower 
decrease  to  the  CJ  condition  which  was  difficult 
to  discern  in  the  profiles  and  consistent  with  the 
Fig. 1. Illustration of the particle velocity profile of 
a  detonating  explosive  as  a  function  of  distance 
showing  the  vN  spike  and  sonic  CJ  conditions 
that  define  the  chemical  reaction  zone  and  the 
Taylor wave  region behind CJ  which  varies  as  a 
function of support. 
Measurements  of  the  stress  pressure  GPa 
and particle velocities of the vN and CJ states and 
detonation front provide data that form the basis of 
reactive  burn  models  and  detonation  propagation 
models  that  explicitly  simulate  the  reaction  zone 
such as the Detonation-Shock-Dynamics-PseudoReaction-Zone 
Alamos.7-9 Detonation wave profiles are typically 
measured  using  optical  velocimetry10  which 
employs an interferometer to measure the Dopplershifted light at a sample window interface when a 
shock  or  detonation  wave  reaches  the  interface. 
Both VISAR Velocity  Interferometer  System  for 
Any Reflector11 which typically uses   532 nm 
and PDV photonic Doppler velocimetry12 which 
employs      1550  nm  light  are  qualitatively 
similar in that they are both used to obtain particle 
interface.  Reaction  zone  measurements  while 
necessary  for  constructing  realistic  reactive  burn 
models  are  difficult 
to  make  using  optical 
velocimetry  for  several  reasons.    These  include 
shock reverberation or ring-up timescales in foil 
mirrors  limitations  in  the  temporal  resolution 
uncertainties  in  the  unreacted  Hugoniot  at  vN 
spike  conditions  due  to  extrapolation  from  low 
pressures  and  interaction  of  characteristics  at  the 
explosive-window  interface  with  the  detonation 
wave. An ideal window material for measuring the 
detonation  profile  would  provide  a  near
at 
earlier  studies.  In  this  study  we  summarize  and 
compare  CRZ  dynamics  in  PBX  9502  at  three 
different  windowed  interfaces  PMMA  LiF  and 
Kel-F 800 using PDV and show that Kel-F 800 is 
measurements in detonating explosives. 
Polychlorotrifluoroethylene-co-vinylidene 
fluoride  Kel-F  800  Lot  30013  was  purchased 
from  3M  Inc.  St.  Paul  Minnesota.    Small    150 
mm150  mm50mm  billets  were  prepared  by 
compression molding Afton Plastics the polymer 
at 90 oC and 50000 psi.  This method resulted in 
a  semi-transparent  golden-colored  billet  from 
which  window  samples  were  machined.  The 
window  samples  were  further  prepared  by  hand 
polishing  on  successively  finer  paper  down  to 
1200 grit.   Differential scanning calorimetry TA 
Instruments  Q2000  was  performed  to  determine 
the initial  crystallinity of the window material.  
The  heat  of  fusion  Hf    3.338  Jg  was 
endotherm at 82.1 oC.  Using Eq. 1  
and the weight  and heat of fusion of crystalline 
polychlorotrifluoroethylene   H f
the initial  crystallinity was found to be 5.9.2123  Additional properties of the Kel-F 800 windows 
used in this study are given in Table 1.24-28 
Table 1.  Properties of Kel-F 800 in this study. 
Refractive index   1.417 518 nm 
types  of  dynamic  experiments  were 
experiments  aimed  at  a  preliminary  investigation 
of  the  Kel-F  800  window  correction  at  532  and 
1550  nm  and  detonation  experiments  of  PBX 
9502  with  PMMA  Kel-F  800  and  LiF  windows 
aimed  at  comparison  of  the  detonation  chemical 
reaction zone profiles at three different windowed 
Gas gun-driven plate impact experiments were 
performed  using  a 
described  previously29  with  a  50  mm  diameter 
smooth bore launch tube.  The window correction 
experiments  are  symmetric  impact  experiments 
similar  to  those  employed  by  Jones  et  al.31-32 
Jensen et al.33 and LaLone et al.34 for sapphire zcut  quartz  and  LiF.32-35  The  experimental 
geometry is shown schematically in Fig. 2. Briefly 
a thin 3.5 mm thick Kel-F 800 target sample   
38.1  mm  is  impacted  by  a  thicker  x  7.7  mm 
and  larger  diameter      43.2  mm  Kel-F  800 
impactor  creating  a  symmetric  impact  condition.  
A 5 m Al foil was glued to the front surface of 
the  target  sample  to  obtain  the  input  particle 
velocity.  A  532  nm  VISAR  probe  Valyn  Inc. 
Albuquerque  NM  and  2  1550  nm  PDV  probes 
AC  Photonics  part  1CL15P020LC-C01  were 
focused  on  the  Al  foil  at  the  impact  interface 
through the transparent Kel-F 800 target window.  
In addition a vapor-deposited 8 k Al mirror was 
coated on the rear surface of the Kel-F 800 target 
window  and  used  to  measure  the  free  surface 
velocity  using  a  PDV  probe.    A  4th  PDV  probe 
located on the outer diameter   38.1 mm of the 
target  sample  was  used 
to  obtain  projectile 
velocity from reflection of 1550 nm light off of the 
approaching projectile. The projectile velocity was 
also  measured  using  the  optical  interruption  of  4 
laser  diodes  located  at  the  exit  interface  of  the 
launch tube.  Error in projectile velocity is  0.1.  
The  measured  impact  velocities  Hugoniot  states 
and apparent velocities by both VISAR and PDV 
from  the  4  window  correction  experiments  are 
summarized  in  Table  2  and  were  performed  at 
shock pressures from 7.4-16.6 GPa.   
Two  types  of  experiments  were  used  to 
measure  PBX  9502  detonation  particle  velocity 
profiles at LiF PMMA and Kel-F 800 windowed 
experiments  of  this  type  were  performed.  In  shot 
2s-791  the  impact  velocity  Kel-F  81  impactor 
was Vproj   2.954  0.002 kms which imparted a 
sustained  shock  into  PBX  9502  at  15.1  GPa 
run-distance-to-detonation 
measured of x    3.92  mm.  In shot 2s-792  the 
impact  velocity  Kel-F  81  impactor  was  Vproj     
2.944  0.005 kms reaching 15.0 GPa and x  
Fig.  3.  Experimental  schematic  for  symmetric 
impact window correction experiments.  
The  Kel-F  800  window  thickness  was  12.877   
0.005 mm in 2s-791 and 12.814  0.005 mm in 2s792.    Salient  features  of  the  experiments  and 
detonation wave profiles are summarized in Table 
manufactured  by  the  Holston  Army  Ammunition 
Plant Kingsport TN and pressed at LANL. 
Gas gun-driven plate impact techniques were used 
to  perform  1-dimensional  shock  and  initiation 
experiments  to  provide  preliminary  estimates  of 
the Kel-F 800 window corrections at 532 and 1550 
nm  and  compare  PBX  9502  detonation  particle 
velocity wave profiles at three different windowed 
interfaces PMMA Kel-F 800 and LiF. 
Kel-F 800 Window Correction 
velocimetry  measures 
velocity  and  must  be  corrected  for  increasing 
refractive  index  with  shock  compression  by  a 
window  correction  which  scales  the  apparent 
velocity to the true velocity.31-35 42 Four symmetric 
impact  experiments  were performed  to  obtain  the 
window correction for Kel-F 800 at typical VISAR 
and PDV laser wavelengths of   532 and 1550 
nm.  At  the  symmetric  impact  condition  the 
Fig.  2.  Experimental  schematic  for  symmetric 
impact window correction experiments.  
In all of the experiments PBX 9502 was initiated 
by  a  supported  shock  wave  created  by  planar 
impact of a gas gun-driven Kel-F 81 impactor onto 
the  explosive.  The  experiments  employing  LiF 
2s-739 and PMMA 2s-766 windows used KelF 81 impactors launched at  3.5 kms to promptly 
initiate nominally 6 mm thick PBX 9502 at 23oC.  
At this impact velocity the input shock condition 
is  Pin    22  GPa  which  produces  a  turnover-todetonation at x  2 mm.  In shot 2s-739 a Kel-F 
81 impactor was impacted into 5.991  0.003 mm 
of  PBX  9502  backed  by  a  12.806    0.005  mm 
thick  oriented  110  single  crystal  LiF  window 
REFLEX  Analytical  Corp.  at  Vproj    3.526   
0.003  kms.  The  LiF  window  was  coated  with  a 
vapor-deposited  8  k  specular  mirror  for  PDV 
measurements of the interface velocity. In shot 2s766  5.987    0.003  mm  of  PBX  9502  was 
impacted  by  Kel-F  81  at  Vproj    3.489    0.003 
kms.    The  detonation  profile  was  measured 
through  a  19.017    0.008  mm  thick  PMMA 
window Rohm  Haas Type II UVA also coated 
with a vapor-deposited 8 k specular mirror at the 
explosivePMMA interface. 
Experiments  using  Kel-F  800  windows  were 
LANL  wedge  target  assemblies  nominally  23 
mm thick used for making in situ particle velocity 
measurements with electromagnetic gauges.  Each 
target  contained  a  single  electromagnetic  gauge 
element  on  the  impact  face  and  an  embedded 
gauge  package  on  a  30o  angle  Fig.  3.  An  8  k 
mirror was also coated on the Kel-F 800 window 
at the PBX 9502window interface but the mirror 
surface  was  diffuse  and  a  single  point  dual  vpf 
VISAR  measurement  was  attempted  at  the center 
position. 4 PDV probes each separated by 90o on a 
    18.288  mm  diameter  circle  were  directed  at 
same  explosivewindow 
Table 2. Summary of symmetric impact experiments of Kel-F 800.  Us is the measured shock velocity. up is the 
true particle velocity obtained from the measured impact velocity.  um is the measured particle velocity and uR 
is the particle velocity at the index change.  nD is the shocked refractive index.  P and  are the shock pressure 
and density respectively. 
material particle velocity up is equal to half of the 
impact velocity u0 Eq. 2 
The  impact  velocities  were  measured  using  both 
the optical interruption of 4 laser diodes at the end 
of  the  gas  gun  launch  tube  by  the  projectile  as 
well as a direct measurement of the velocity of the 
approaching projectile by PDV and are reported in 
Table 2. Shock velocity Us was determined by the 
measured  shock  transit  time  t    t2-t1  through 
the sample and initial thickness x according to Eq. 
3. The shock arrival times of impact t1 and wave 
arrival at the rear free surface t2 were determined 
from raw PDV arrival times and verified using the 
measured changes in particle velocity in the PDV 
and VISAR wave profiles.  
The  shock  pressure  and  shock  density  were  then 
calculated  using  the  conservation  equations  Eqs. 
4-5 using the measured initial density of the Kel-F 
experiments  are  summarized  in  Table  2.    These 
new  states  are  also  plotted  in  the  shock  velocityparticle velocity Us-up plane in Fig. 4 along with 
previously  reported  Hugoniot  data  from  Ref.  30 
and  the  measured  bulk  sound  velocity  for  Kel-F 
800.24  The linear Rankine-Hugoniot fit to the data 
Us    1.8830.070  1.8200.057up  is  also 
shown  and  overestimates  the  bulk  sound  velocity 
as  is  common  to  polymers.30    Note  that  this  new 
linear  Us-up  fit  is  the  same  as  that  reported 
previously within error Us  1.838  1.824up.30 
Fig.  4.  Measured  Hugoniot  states  for  Kel-F  800 
from  this  study  and  Ref.  30  in  the  Us-up  plane.  
The linear Rankine-Hugoniot fit to the data in this 
plane is Us  1.8830.070 1.8200.057up. 
The  measured  velocity  um  by  VISAR  and  PDV 
differs from the true velocity up 
by the shocked refractive index nD which for a 
single shock wave is 
To  determine  the  optical  window  correction  the 
refractive index must be calculated over a range of 
shocked densities.  Particle velocity wave profiles 
experiments  providing  the  apparent  velocity  um 
at 532 and 1550 nm as well as the index change 
from  the  drop  in  particle  velocity  uR  when  the 
shock  wave  reaches  the  free  surface.  Particle 
velocity  profiles  measured  by  PDV  in  the  4 
experiments  are  shown  in  Fig.  5  from  which  um 
and  uR  were  obtained  Table  2.  The  shocked 
refractive index can be calculated using Eq. 8 
Reference Guide lists a value of n0  1.46  not 
reported assumed to be 500-550 nm.27 Skidmore 
et al. reported a value of n0  1.417  0.002 at 518 
nm.25  Most  recently  Jeong  et  al.  measured  n0   
1.420  at  532  nm  at  ambient  conditions  and  as  a 
function of pressure within high pressure diamond 
anvil cells.28 We used the value of n0  1.420 from 
Jeong  et  al.  to  calculate  nD  presented  in  Table  2 
and plotted in Fig. 6.  In addition we plot selected 
nD  at  static  high  pressure  determined  from 
Brillouin  scattering  and  the  room  temperature 
isotherm.283637  Overall  there  is  good  agreement 
between  the  static  measured  nD  and  the  shocked 
refractive indices at 532 nm. 
     n0   1.402  0.002 at 1550 nm was measured 
using  spectral  ellipsometry  of  thin  538-1138   
Kel-F  800  films  on  a  silicon  substrate.  The 
wavelength-dependent  optical  dispersion  of  many 
polymers  have  been  measured  and  have  been 
represented by Sellmeier and Cauchy functions.3841  Kel-F  800  is  consistent  with  most  polymers 
which  exhibit  a  0.6-1.6  decrease  in  n0  between 
532  and  1550  nm.  Figure  6  shows  the  calculated 
refractive  indices  of  Kel-F  800  at  532  and  1550 
nm  as  a  function  of  shocked  density.    From  the 
linear fit to the data 
the  window  correction  is  obtained  as  the  zerodensity  intercept  a.  The  linear  fits  shown  in 
at 532 nm  n 1.0130.034 0.2030.013 
which  requires  the  measured  Hugoniot  state  and 
ambient refractive index n0 at 532 and 1550 nm.  
The  ambient  refractive  index  of  Kel-F  800  has 
been  reported  previously.  The  LLNL  Explosives 
Table 3. Summary of measured and calculated features of the chemical reaction zone in PBX 9502 at PMMA 
LiF and Kel-F 800 windows.  Also given are the initial densities lot numbers and initial temperatures of the 
PBX 9502 target samples used in this study.  
at 1550 nm n 1.0140.003 0.1930.001  
which indicate that the window correction is small 
1 in up for Kel-F 800 similar to PMMA a 
 1.013  0.034 at 532 nm a  1.014  0.003 at 
1550  nm.    The  window  correction  may  also  be 
obtained from the slope  u
of a linear fit of the u 
vs.  up  data  or  from  other  functions  representing 
data in this plane such as a power law relationship.   
From  the  linear  fit  in  Fig.  6  inset  we  obtain  a 
correction of 1.021  0.003 at 1550 nm. 
Fig. 6. Shocked index of refraction of Kel-F 800 at 
532  and  1550  nm  from  the  4  symmetric  impact 
experiments.    Also  shown  in  the  plot  are  several 
calculated  nD  at  pressure  from  static  Brillouin 
experiments  and  the  Kel-F 800  isotherm  reported 
in Ref. 35.  The inset shows  u  um  upvs. up 
WSD unreacted and product Hugoniots which 
experimental  data  respectively8  are  shown  in 
Figure 7 along with the linear Us-up Hugoniots in 
P-up of PMMA 0  1.186 gcm3 c0  2.598 s 
1.516  LiF  0    2.640  gcm3  c0    5.215  s 
1.351  and  Kel-F  800  0    2.01  gcm3  c0  
  The  vN  spike  and  CJ 
conditions  at  the  three  windows  are  annotated  by 
the open and black circles respectively.  From Fig. 
the  measured  particle 
9502window  interfaces  differ  greatly  due  to  the 
different shock impedances of the windows. In the 
case of the Kel-F 800 window the shock Hugoniot 
lies  between  the  unreacted  PBX  9502  Hugoniot 
and PBX 9502 products isentrope this is the best 
Fig. 5. Measured apparent particle velocity wave 
profiles  recorded  using  1550  nm  PDV.  The 
measured particle velocity exceeds the true particle 
velocity by u  um  up see Table 2.  
Influence of window on PBX 9502 CRZ dynamics 
PBX  9502  is  an  insensitive  high  explosive  based 
on TATB.  Slower chemical reaction rates in PBX 
9502  result  in  a  temporally-extended  chemical 
reaction  zone  behind 
compared with conventional high explosives such 
as PBX 9501.891014-20 Similar to nitromethane the 
CRZ of PBX 9502 has been previously reported to 
have  a  two-step  decay  in particle  velocity  behind 
the front with a fast reaction occurring in  2050  ns  followed  by  a  slow  reaction  to  the  CJ 
condition  over    200-300  ns.  It  has  been 
is  associated  with 
decomposition of TATB to fluid products and the 
that  can  be  done 
the  detonation  particle 
velocity  profiles  measured  by  PDV  at  PMMA 
Kel-F 800 and LiF interfaces.  The interactions of 
the  wave  characteristics  at  the  windows  with  the 
detonation wave are reflected in the wave profiles.  
The profile recorded at a PBX 9502LiF interface 
shot  2s-739  shows  a  clear  fast  reaction  rate 
indicated by a faster decrease in interface particle 
velocity  behind  the  front.    At  LiF  a  reflected 
the  partially-reacted 
products.  The  fast  part  of  the  temporal  decay  in 
particle velocity occurs over  20 ns to up  1.82 
mms  followed  by  a  slower  decay  to  the 
predicted uCJ  1.63 mms. The measured particle 
velocity at the front vN spike at the LiF window 
is  uvN    2.27    0.08  mms  at  23  oC  with  an 
estimated  reaction  zone  timescale  of  0.21    0.02 
impedance  PMMA  window 
produces a rarefaction fan in the detonation wave 
and greater measured interface particle velocities 
uvN    3.20  mms  at  23  oC.    The  rarefaction 
interaction  with  the  partially  reacted  products 
extends the reaction zone to 0.27 s at 23 oC and 
the fast decay is no longer observed. The decay 
in particle velocity occurs continuously over 300 
ns.  The wave profile  and reaction  zone  measured 
at PMMA is consistent with that  measured at the 
H2O  window  by  Sheffield  Bloomquist  and 
Kel-F 800 provides a near perfect impedance 
match to the explosive and is the closest to an in 
situ  measurement  of  the  detonation  wave  profile. 
The measured profiles at Kel-F 800 show the same 
fastslow  features  observed  at  LiF  with  the  fast 
decay occurring over 22  5 ns and a slower decay 
to the predicted uCJ  2.04  0.01 mms over 280  
There  are  some  common  features  to  the 
profiles.  No discernable break is observed in any 
of the profiles that would indicate CJ which is in 
agreement  with  earlier  conclusions.1014-20  Our 
estimates  of  CJ  Table  3  are  based  on  the  PBX 
9502 products EOS and unreacted Hugoniot of the 
window  materials.  In  addition 
windows  generally  return  noisier  profiles  within 
the reaction zone which is suspected to be due to 
the  window  material.  
However they remain transparent at 1550 nm for 
  1  s  in  contact  with  detonating  PBX  9502  in 
which the interface pressure reaches 30 GPa. 
Fig. 7. Unreacted and product Hugoniots for PBX 
9502  from  the  Wescott-Stewart-Davis  WSD 
calibration  to  experimental  data  in  inert  and 
overdriven regimes.  The predicted vN spike open 
circle  and  CJ  black  circle  conditions  measured 
at  LiF  Kel-F  800  and  PMMA  are  shown.  Note 
that Kel-F 800 provides a near perfect impedance 
match to PBX 9502.  
Fig.  8.  Particle  velocity  wave  profiles  of 
detonating PBX 9502 measured at PMMA Kel-F 
800 and LiF windows using PDV measured in this 
study.  The Kel-F 800 profile was corrected using 
the 1550 nm window correction reported here.  
Figure  8  compares  calculated  detonation 
profiles  from  direct  numerical  simulations  using 
the  WSD  reactive  burn  model  with  the  measured 
profiles  from  shots  2s-739  2s-766  and  2s-791.  
simulated using a simple conservative Lagrangian 
numerical  scheme  utilizing  a  second-order  total 
variation diminishing TVD interpolation and an 
approximate Reimann solver used to integrate the 
multi-material Euler equations. The spatial domain 
initially  10  m.  Further 
discretization  was 
elements of the numerical method are described in 
Ref.  10.  The  model  includes  the  reactant  EOS 
product EOS and WSD reaction rates.  In addition 
material  models  for  the  Kel-F  81  impactor  0   
2.14  gcm3  c0    2.05  mms  s  1.516  0    1 
Kel-F 800 window 0  2.016 gcm3 c0  1.883 
mms  s  1.82  0    1  and  LiF  0    2.640 
gcm3  c0    5.215  mms  s  1.351  0    1.69 
were  used  based  on  previously  determined  linear 
from  principal  Hugoniot 
measurements.  A  Keane-based  Mie-Grneisen 
EOS was also developed for the Lexan projectile. 
The  simulated  profiles  in  Fig.  8  were  timecorrected to the peak measured particle velocity in 
the experimental waveforms.   
     Overall the numerical simulations using simple 
EOS  for  the  window  materials  and  the  LANL 
WSD  model  for  PBX  9502  produce  excellent 
matches to the experimental profiles.  In all three 
cases  the  simulated  vN  spike  differs  slightly  in 
up  than  the  measured  profile  which  is  expected 
1.  Zeldovich  Ya.  B.  Raizer  Yu. P.  Physics  of 
shock  waves  and  high-temperature  hydrodynamic 
phenomena  Dover  Publications  Inc.  Mineola 
2.  Fickett  W.  Davis  W.  C.  Detonation  Theory 
and  Experiment  Dover  Publications 
3. Shaw M. S. Johnson J. D. J. Appl. Phys. vol. 
4. Johnson J. D. Ninth Symposium International 
on Detonation vol. ONR 113291-7 417 1989. 
due to the ns time resolution of VISARPDV not 
resolving the spike and the imperfect nature of the 
interface  Al  mirror  and  glue  bond.    The  WSD 
model  WSD  predicts  a  faster  and  larger decay  in 
particle velocity at the PBX 9502LiF interface in 
2s-739.  This may be due to a WSD product sound 
velocity that is too low as described previously10 
or deficiencies in the reaction rate law.  
The  measured  profile  at 
window  is  the  first  ns-resolved  profile  using  an 
impedance matched window and confirms that the 
reaction  zone  in  PBX  9502  occurs  over  fast  and 
slow steps with tfast  22  5 ns tslow  280   10 
ns and a predicted uCJ  2.04  0.01 mms. The 
overall CRZ length from the measured profiles at 
Kel-F 800 is estimated to be  2.2 mm. Phenomenological Description of the Spontaneous Detonation Mechanism in
Moistened Ammonium Nitrate and Sodium Dichloroisocyanurate Mixture
H. N. Presles B A. Khasainov P. Vidal V. Montassier B A. Ermolaev and A. A. Sulimov
Institut PPRIME P UPR 3346 CNRS Departement Fluide-Thermique-Combustion ENSMA 86961
Semenov Institute of Chemical Physics RAN 119991 Moscow - Russia
Futuroscope-Chasseneuil France
Abstract. Dry mixture of Ammonium Nitrate AN and Sodium Dichloroisocyanurate
DCCNa or SDIC is chemically stable at normal temperature. However local moistening of the mixture triggers chemical reactions which release gaseous nitrogen trichloride
N Cl3 a highly unstable explosive product. Convection and condensation of this gas
in a dry part of the AN-DCCNa mixture adjacent to the moistened one makes this zone
extremely sensitive. Provoked or self-ignition in this zone always results in a very fast
transition to detonation. This paper provides a phenomenological description of the explosion mechanism. Moistened AN-DCCNa mixture is extremely dangerous and its behavior
unpredictable. A strong recommendation is that AN and DCCNa should never cross.
Dichloroisocyanurate
chemically stable components under normal conditions. Their mixture becomes very unstable when
water is locally injected. Contact of chlorines with
ammonium salts is known1 to produce nitrogen
trichloride N Cl3 a very sensitive explosive
molecule.2 This molecule has been detected3
among gaseous products from AN-DCCNa mixtures
reaction through UV spectroscopy and
FTIR Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer
Contamination of AN by DCCNa is one of likely
causes of the explosion of an AN storage warehouse
inside the AZF plant Toulouse - September 21st
2001. The explosion of 300-400 tons of downgraded off-specs fertilizer and technical grade AN
has killed 31 people injured several thousand people and damaged 30000 houses.
Preliminary experiments have shown that addition of small quantity of water a few  to 5050
AN-DCCNa mixture results in
- exothermic chemical reaction which starts
immediately in the moistened part of the mixture
- an increase of local temperature inside the
reaction zone up to or above 100oC
- production of explosive gas which convects outside of the reaction zone. A hot wire or
an electric igniter localized a few centimeters above
a small pile of the moistened mixture provokes the
explosion of this gas diluted in the surrounding air
- a spontaneous explosion without any pyrotechnic device or hot wire. Time from water injection to spontaneous explosion can last between a
few tenths of seconds to a few tenths of minutes.
The goal of this paper is to i experimentally de
407
Fig. 1. Samples of IAN AAN and DCCNa.
scribe the explosive ability of AN-DCCNa mixtures
partly moistened by water injection and ii provide
a phenomenological description of the spontaneous
explosion mechanism.
2. Chemical Products
Ammonium Nitrate AN N H4N O3 M  80
gmole is widely used as fertilizer but also thanks
to its oxidizing properties as a component of the
composition of certain propellants for rocket engines and commercial blasting explosives. Two varieties of AN are marketed to answer the two types
of applications fertilizer AAN the rst A stands for
Agricultural on one hand and technical grade IAN
I for Industrial on the other hand which is distinguished from the former in particular by a heavy
AN is regarded as a weak explosive not very
sensitive to detonation and although having been
present in accidents of very great scale as aforementioned AZF plant explosion its detonation was
not the subject of in depth studies except for the
Most of our experiments were performed with
Technical Grade IAN. Its apparent density ranges
between 0.64 and 0.83 gcm3. It looks like quasispherical porous white grains of size ranging between 1 and 2 mm gure 1. Some detonation characteristics of this product are presented elsewhere.5
Fertilizer AAN was used in a few experiments. It
looks like quasi-spherical white grains of size ranging between 3 and 4 mm.
Sodium Dichloroisocyanurate DCCNa AZF
commercial name ONIACHLOR 60 is a chlorinated product C3Cl2N3N aO3 M  219.9
gmole mainly used as a water disinfectant for instance in swimming pools. It has a form of white
grains with a size between 150 m and 1.6 mm. Its
apparent density ranges from 0.85 to 0.92 gcm3.
All the chemical products used in this study have
been manufactured by AZF plant and provided by
Grande Paroisse Company.
3. Experimental Study
3.1. Experimental Conguration and Phenomenology of Explosion
Most of the experiments presented in this paper
have been performed with 5050 mixture of AN and
DCCNa this mass proportion being close to that of
the stoichiometric mixture 5248. The mixture of
three AN moles with one DCCNa mole corresponds
to the stoichiometric mixture i.e. complete oxidation of hydrogen and carbon so for 1 g of DCCNA
there is 1.1 g of AN in such a mixture. Stoichiometric or slightly rich mixture is the most relevant from
detonation point of view sensitivity performance.
However large grain size of the components prevents getting an intimate mixture and detonation of
real mixture is strongly non-ideal. Critical charge
diameter for detonation can be estimated relying
upon detonation experiments unpublished results.
It is between 21 and 27 mm in strong connement
steel and between 80 and 150 mm in plastic tubes
according to K. Shvedov and V. Lavrov Institute of
Chemical Physics Chernogolovka Russia.
Moreover according to the global
chemical scheme3 the 5050 AN-DCCNa mixture is a good compromise for hypoclorous acid
HOCl - 1st step and nitrogen trichloride N Cl3
- 2nd step production. An attempt of theoretical
analysis of reaction mechanism of this mixture is
All the experiments were conducted in vertical
tubes made of PMMA glass or steel gure 2
length between 230 and 300 mm and internal diameter between 8 and 25 mm. After having poured the
AN-DCCNa mixture into the vertical tube a small
amount of water was injected in the mixture at 1 cm
from the bottom of the tube with a needle through
the tube wall gure 2 or through the bottom plate
closing the tube gure 10. The volume of injected
water allowed moistening only the bottom part of
the mixture the upper part remaining dry.
This experimental protocol allows studying the
behavior of a bed of dry AN-DCCNa mixture
Fig. 2. Typical experimental set-up PMMA tube
lled with IAN-DCCNa mixture.
3.2. Explosion Caused by Provoked Ignition
Fig. 3. Evolution of the 5050 AN-DCCNa mixture
after water injection 30 s between the two rst images then 60 s.
poured on a wet ground.
Figure 3 displays a series of pictures taken by
a video-recorder 24 imagessecond of part of the
tube presented in gure 2. As soon as water is injected exothermic chemical reactions start as is evidenced both by camera records and thermocouple
measurements. These reactions produce gas which
contributes to push up water inside the mixture over
a few centimeters. Simultaneously this part of the
mixture becomes yellowish or greenish - see 2nd
image 30 seconds after water injection. The length
of the yellowish zone YZ increases with time and
on the next image 1 minute later two YZs appear
with in between an enlarging white zone. The
upper YZ UYZ remains out of contact with water while in the bottom YZ the mixture is wet.
The yellowish color reveals that chlorinated products evolve from the chemical reactions. Cl2 in gas
or liquid state has the same yellowish color and liquid N Cl3 is of bright-yellow color.
As it will be seen later the upper yellowish zone
UYZ plays a very important role in the explosion
mechanism this is why most of this paper is devoted
to exploring and understanding its creation and behavior.
In all the experiments presented in this section
an explosion has been provoked by an electric igniter Davey Bickford-N28B mounted inside the
tube above the mixture gure 2. Figure 4 which
presents two successive images of a series taken by
the digital video camera shows that ring an igniter
at the top of the tube ignites the UYZ in this experiment the bottom part of the tube was inserted in a
steel tube which prevents seeing the lower part of
This observation indicates that the igniting device is surrounded by a very sensitive gas which
is able to drive a ame invisible on the record
through grains of the mixture here on a length of
about 10 cm down to the UYZ initiating its explosion. According to13 this gas is nitrogen trichloride
N Cl3. It can explode3 when its concentration in
In this experiment the igniter was touching the
top of the mixture. Same event happens when
the igniting device electric igniter or hot wire is
placed a few cm above the mixture gure 6.
Figure 5 compares the last video-camera image
of the UYZ before explosion with images of the explosion obtained with a high-speed camera Photron
RS 3000 180000 imagessecond exposure time
1s for two identical experiments. The igniter is
here also localized above the mixture.
Fig. 4. Ignition of the UYZ by ring the igniter.
In spite of identical initial conditions some differences arise in the explosion mechanism. Just before explosion the state of the mixture in the two
tubes is very similar the UYZ is at the same level
and has the same length.
Figure 5a shows that two opposite ame fronts
start at the top of the UYZ. One is a detonation
wave going through this zone at a velocity of about
1200 ms and failing at the junction with the white
zone. The second front goes upwards at a velocity
of about 380 ms over a distance of 6-7 mm. This
record allows one to conclude that
1 - explosion in the UYZ results in detona
tion build-up
2 - the transition to detonation in the UYZ is
so fast that it hardly can be considered as the classical deagration to detonation transition mechanism
in secondary explosives
3 - detonation was not transmitted from the
UYZ to the white zone which means that its chemical composition cannot detonate.
Figure 5b shows that explosion starts close to the
bottom of the UYZ approximately at the level of
the mark on the tube.
Detonation propagates upwards rst inside the
UYZ at a velocity of about 1700 ms and then in the
IAN-DCCNa mixture along about 2 cm with a decreasing velocity and then fails since the charge diameter 12 mm is signicantly lower than the critical diameter of this mixture higher than 80 mm in
Fig. 5. Detonation in the UYZ. PMMA tube 12
mm internal diameter. 16 g of 5050 AN-DCCNa
mixture. Provoked explosion 5 minutes after water
injection 0.5 cm3. Initial temperature To  18oC.
Two experiments under the same initial conditions.
Figure 5b shows that detonation was transmitted
from the UYZ to the IAN-DCCNa mixture located
The main difference between these two experiments is that detonation in the UYZ happened at two
different levels at the top of the UYZ in gure 5a
and close to the bottom of UYZ in gure 5b in
spite of the same localization of the igniter. This difference could be attributed to heterogeneous character of the mixture. Indeed noticeable distinction
between grain size and density of the two components could prevent their perfect mixing.
The goal of following tests is to look at the effect
of the AN variety IAN or AAN on the UYZ.
Three experiments have been done with 10 g of
5050 IAN-DCCNa gure 6a and AAN-DCCNa
gure 6bc mixtures conned in PMMA tubes of
10 mm internal diameter and 230 mm length. The
igniter was red 2 minutes after water injection 0.4
cm3. Explosion happened in all three experiments.
Comparing the localization of the UYZ just before
ring the igniter with the recovered parts of the tube
after explosion upper and bottom parts one can
see that the explosion was centered on the UYZ.
In case b with 40 of AAN grinded the UYZ is
less developed than in case a and mixture remained
in the upper part of the tube after explosion. In case
c with full grains of AAN the UYZ is not as well
Fig. 6. Results of experiments with 10 g of a IANDCCNa b AAN-DCCNa 40 of AAN grinded
and c AAN-DCCNa full grains of AAN at To 
19oC. The initial tube the state of the mixture just
before ring and the recovered parts of the tube are
shown for each mixture.
dened as in the two other experiments. Its lower
limit could be close to the bottom of the tube which
would explain that this part has been broken.
These experiments demonstrate that whatever the
AN type a UYZ is formed and is able to explode.
They also show that activation of the igniter and
ame propagation in the reactive gas along the tube
and through the mixture above the UYZ do not produce any effect on the tube and on the mixture. Experiments a and b prove that the lower YZ in spite
of the presence of chlorinated molecules including
possibly N Cl3 does not explode.
In order to check whether explosion can happen
in IAN-DCCNa mixtures of different composition
we have tested 7030 and 3070 compositions.
In the rst experiment performed with 10g of
7030 IAN-DCCNa mixture nearly same length of
the column of mixture as in gure 6a activation
of the igniter did not result in explosion. Gaseous
N Cl3 concentration in air around the igniter was
probably too low. So following experiments were
performed with only 5 g of mixture gure 7a and
b the igniter being placed close to the top of the
As in experiments of gure 6 igniter was red 2
minutes after water injection 0.4 cm3 and explosion happened in both mixtures.
Fig. 7. Each series of images displays the initial
tube the state of the mixture 5 g just before ring
and the recovered parts of the tube  To  19oC
a 7030 IAN-DCCNa b 3070 IAN-DCCNa.
In case of gure 7a the UYZ in the 7030 IANDCCNa mixture was less developed and its color
less intense than in the 5050 mixture gure 6a
which indicates a lower production of N Cl3 conrming the fact that no explosion happened in the
rst experiment involving 10g of this mixture.
Figure 7b displays a different behavior. The top
of the mixture was pushed up on about 16 mm under
the intense gaseous production from the chemical
reactions. Contrary to the previous experiment the
UYZ reaches the top of the mixture. A longer part
of the tube was destroyed by the explosion. That
could be due to a higher gaseous N Cl3 concentration in air andor to N Cl3 condensation along the
tube as it can be seen on gure 7b over about 2 cm
In conclusion the UYZ is created and explodes
in partly moistened IAN-DCCNa mixtures within a
large range of mixture composition.
Strength of PMMA being very low the preceding experiments do not allow to appreciate how
powerful is the explosion. So experiments similar to those of gure 6 have been done with steel
tubes. For this purpose 28 g of IAN-DCCNa mixture were poured in a steel tube of 16 mm internal diameter wall thickness 2 mm and 250 mm
length. The igniter was red 5 minutes after water
injection 0.9cm3. At that moment the estimated
length of the UYZ is about 5 cm. Figure 8 shows
in the case of spontaneous explosion we focused
investigations on the UYZ.
Experiments were performed using transparent
connement made of PMMA or glass tubes and
as spontaneous explosion happens easier inside bigger charges the internal diameter of the tubes was
larger than in previous experiments.
As previously a digital video camera 24 imagessecond was used to record transformations inside the mixture after water injection and a high
speed camera allowed to catch the explosive event.
As at the frequency of 180000 imagess the recording time of the fast camera is 7 s it is necessary
to reset the camera several times during the experiment with the risk of missing the self-ignited explosion.
Two experiments are presented. They globally
show same results but also some differences.
In Figure 9 59 g of IAN-DCCNa mixture were
placed in a glass tube of 24 mm internal diameter and 250 mm length. Self-ignition happened 1
minute after water injection 1.8 cm3. The UYZ is
well dened. According to the rst picture of the
series obtained with the high-speed camera selfignition could have happened at the bottom part of
the UYZ. It generated a detonation propagating upwards along the UYZ at a velocity of approximately
4000 ms and then in the mixture over about 3 cm
at a mean velocity of 1000 ms. As in Figure 5b
detonation nally failed due to a too small charge
diameter in comparison with its critical value for
detonation propagation.
In Figure 10 88 g of 5050 IAN-DCCNa mixture
were used in a PMMA tube of square cross section
internal size 25  25 mm.
Spontaneous explosion gure 11 happened 50
seconds after water injection 2.8 cm3.
Comparing the last video recorder image before
explosion with images from the fast camera shows
that ignition happened under the UYZ generating
an upward propagating ame the white zone being
not yet formed. Arrival of this ame to the UYZ
triggers a detonation. Detonation velocity in this
zone is estimated at 4000 ms. Then the transmitted detonation into the 5050 IAN-DCCNa mixture
propagated over a distance of at least 5 cm at about
1100 ms and failed. A detonation propagated also
downwards along 1.5 cm at about 1800 ms.
Fig. 8. Steel connement before and after provoked
explosion of 5050 IAN-DCCNa mixture To 
the recovered parts of the tube after explosion. The
tube has been exploded along 13 cm more than two
times the UYZ length showing that detonation in
the UYZ has been transmitted upwards to the IANDCCNa mixture. Fragments of the tube have been
stretched their thickness being less than 1 millimeter. Detonation of dry 5050 IAN-DCCNa mixture
conned in steel tube gave similar fragments proving that most of the IAN contained in the sensitive
zone UYZ has really detonated. Nevertheless detonation failed since the charge diameter 16 mm
was smaller than the critical diameter of this mixture in steel connement between 21 and 27 mm.
The bottom part of the steel tube presents no deformation which once more proves that detonation
did not propagate in the lower YZ.
3.3. Spontaneous Explosion in IAN-DCCNa Mixture Partly Moistened
Self-excitation of explosion of the mixture is a
random process which is important to understand
at least for safety point of view.
In preceding experiments the explosion was provoked by igniter. That allowed determining some
characteristic aspects of the mixture in relation with
the explosion as for instance a fast detonation transition in the UYZ. So expecting a similar behavior
Fig. 9. Spontaneous explosion of the UYZ in 5050
IAN-DCCNa mixture  To  19oC.
Fig. 10. PMMA tube of square cross section.
These experiments show that when a self-ignited
ame starting somewhere in the mixture joins the
UYZ a very fast transition to detonation of this
zone happens transmitting a detonation to the upper mixture. The UYZ plays the role of a booster
for the above IAN-DCCNa mixture.
The goal of the last part of this paper is to explain
how this UYZ is produced.
3.4. Mechanism of Production of the Upper Yellowish Zone
According to our experimental protocol all the
preceding experiments have shown that a very sensitive zone the UYZ is produced in the mixture
whatever the AN type and for a large range of IANDCCNa mixture composition. This zone can detonate detonation being provoked or spontaneous. In
order to understand the origin of this zone we have
performed experiments with tubes equipped with 9
thermocouples K type 1mm size recorder KETHLEY 2700 1 pointsecond. They were inserted
through holes along the tube every 2.5 cm starting
from the bottom of the tube gure 12.
0.6 cm3 of water was injected through a needle in
the bottom plate closing the tube. Figure 13 displays
the evolution of the mixture during 14 minutes. This
record conrms the previous ones and clearly shows
the formation of the UYZ and the white zone. As
Fig. 11. Detonation initiation in the UYZ 5050
IAN-DCCNa mixture To  18oC by a self-ignited
the length of the UYZ increases with time 5 cm
at 14 minutes two times longer than at 2 minutes
the mass of explosive involved in this zone also increases improving its efciency to sustain a detonation transmission.
The initial temperature To of the mixture was
20oC gure 14. The room temperature was 15oC
as indicated by the thermocouple 10.
Chemical reactions start immediately after water
injection 1st image in gure 13. Simultaneously
local temperature at the level of the rst thermocouple 2.5 cm from the bottom of the tube begins to
increase gure 14. So the foot of this signal is
considered as dening the zero time. The signal of
Fig. 14. Thermocouples 1-6
temperature evolution along the mixture To  20oC. Thermocouples 7-9 temperature evolution along the tube
above the mixture. Thermocouple 10 ambient
the 2nd thermocouple 5 cm from the bottom of the
tube and that of the 3rd one 7.5 cm are delayed
respectively by about 1 and 15 seconds time for
water to reach these specic points. The maximum
temperature at the level of the rst thermocouple is
around 73oC and exceeds 100oC at the level of the
When the two rst thermocouples detect temperature increase they are in a slightly yellowish zone
gure 13 1st image. The 3rd thermocouple detects temperature increase gure 13 2nd image
when touched 15 s later by the elevating YZ.
Temperature increase at the level of the 4th thermocouple 10 cm above the bottom of the tube begins about 50 s after water injection i.e. when UYZ
approaches it gure 13 3rd image. The maximum temperature about 55oC is obtained about
20 s later when the thermocouple is in the UYZ gure 13 4th image. Contrary to preceding signals
temperature decreases very slowly and only 8oC are
lost in 13 minutes. That means that heat losses are
compensated by some heating mechanism.
Temperature at the level of the 5th thermocouple starts increasing about 135 seconds after water
injection when the UYZ is close gure 13 6th image and temperature maximum around 45oC is
reached about 6 minutes later when the thermocouple is surrounded by the UYZ gure 13 18th image. As for the 4th thermocouple temperature decrease is slow.
At the top of the mixture the 6th thermocouple is
Fig. 12. The tube equipped with thermocouples
PMMA tube 14 mm internal diameter 250 mm
length. 19 g of 5050 IAN-DCCNa mixture.
Fig. 13. Evolution of the 5050 IAN-DCCNa mixture during 14 minutes. 30 s between two images
15 s between the two rst ones. First image corresponds to water injection.
close but not merged with the UYZ gure 13 last
image the local temperature increases very slowly
by a few degrees. The next thermocouple 7th is
localized in the air 2.5 cm above the top of the mixture. It indicates a small temperature increase less
than 5oC. A slight temperature increase is also detected by the 8th thermocouple. Temperature at the
level of the 9th one remains nearly constant at 20oC
initial temperature of the components in spite of
the lower ambient temperature 15oC.
Highest temperatures were obtained in the upper
part of the lower YZ. Temperatures in the UYZ are
lower but maintained during a long time. These
observations indicate that heat release mechanisms
in these two zones are different. In the lower YZ
exothermic chemical reactions are responsible of
temperature increase and N Cl3 production. Since
boiling temperature of N Cl3 is 71oC vapors of
N Cl3 are produced in this zone where temperature
is higher. At the level of the 2nd and 3rd thermocouples temperatures higher than 71oC last respectively about 4 and 7 minutes gure 14. The process of N Cl3 evaporation seems to be responsible
for the following events
fast temperature decrease at the level of
the 2nd and 3rd thermocouples
whitening of the corresponding zone in
upward ow of gaseous N Cl3 in-between
the grains of the mixture resulting in condensation
of N Cl3 on grain surfaces and formation of the
UYZ with the subsequent heat release.
The temperature increase in the UYZ always less
than 70oC is due to N Cl3 condensation. This is
testied by the difference between the response of
the 4th and 5th thermocouple on one hand and the
6th one on the other. Thermocouple 6 is close but
never gets in contact with the UYZ so the mixture
temperature there is markedly lower than temperature at the level of the 4th and 5th thermocouples.
Since gaseous N Cl3 escapes also from the mixture temperature increase indicated by the thermocouples 7 and 8 could be due to ow of hot gaseous
products and may be to N Cl3 condensation.
The bottom of the mixture remains yellowish because its temperature is nearly always smaller than
70oC. Nevertheless as the vapor pressure of N Cl3
is rather high2 20.27 kPa at 20oC gaseous N Cl3
can ow upwards from this zone.
All the experiments presented here allow describing the mechanism involved in the spontaneous
explosion of partly moistened 5050 IAN-DCCNa
Chemical reactions start as soon as water is injected in the mixture. The color of this zone passes
rapidly from white to yellowish indicating the production of chlorinated molecules like N Cl3. The
temperature of the upper part of this zone being
higher than 71oC boiling temperature of N Cl3 for
several minutes gaseous N Cl3 is convected outside
the reaction zone into the upper dry AN-DCCNa
mixture where temperature is signicantly lower.
So gaseous N Cl3 condensates on AN and DCCNa grains generating the UYZ and corresponding
temperature increase. This mechanism can operate
throughout lot of minutes at least up to the moment
of spontaneous explosion during which the length
of the UYZ increases.
Due to its high vapor pressure gaseous N Cl3 escapes from the mixture this is why it is possible to
initiate the explosion with a heating device localized
a few centimeters above the top of the mixture.
Experiments clearly show that under provoked
or self-ignition a detonation always builds up and
propagates in the UYZ whatever the studied AN
type IAN or AAN and the composition of the ANDCCNa mixture. The state of the steel tube after explosion shows that most of the material contained in
the UYZ has underwent a violent exothermic chemical reaction.
In some experiments detonation velocity in the
UYZ has been estimated to 4000 ms value close
to the ideal detonation velocity of liquid N Cl3
3980 ms.7 So the leading detonation in the UYZ
could be that in a lm of liquid N Cl3 sustaining
detonation of the eventually sensitized AN-DCCNa
In most of the experiments detonation in the
UYZ was transmitted to the above IAN-DCCNa
mixture but failed after short propagation distance
since the size of the charge was signicantly smaller
than its critical diameter. In fact the propagation
distance of this detonation increases with the size of
the charge 2 cm for a 12 mm diameter charge g
415
ure 5b and more than 5 cm in the charge of 25 mm
square cross section gure 11.
In charges of size bigger than the critical diameter the transmitted detonation from the UYZ consumes all the mixture without failure. This has been
conrmed unpublished results with steel tubes of
42 mm internal diameter lled with 5050 IANDCCNa mixture.
Finally detonation was never transmitted from
the UYZ to the white zone and the lower YZ moistened part of the AN-DCCNa mixture. The remaining materials after completion of chemical reactions
between AN and DCCNa cannot detonate.
Moistened Ammonium Nitrate-DCCNa mixture
chemically reacts generating nitrogen trichloride
N Cl3 a very unstable chemical species. N Cl3
explodes upon contact with fats greases and most
organic compounds and for temperature equal or
higher than 93oC.8910 Due to high temperature
in the reaction zone and high volatility of N Cl3
vapors of N Cl3 are convected upwards and condensate on the grains of the dry mixture which becomes yellowish forming the upper yellowish zone
UYZ. A provoked ignition or just self-ignition always leads to fast detonation build up in this zone.
Performance of this detonation is sufciently high
to transmit detonation to the upper dry IAN-DCCNa
mixture. So this UYZ plays the role of a detonation
booster for the charge N Cl3 being the self-igniter
due to its great chemical instability. The length of
the UYZ increasing with time the mass of explosive involved in the booster also increases improving its ability to induce a detonation in the main
charge. Provided the charge size be large enough
higher than its critical diameter all the dry part of
the mixture detonates.
This work shows that a pile of AN-DCCNa mixture with its bottom part locally moistened becomes
very sensitive and dangerous.
to detonation transition and random behavior suggest that mixing of AN and DCCNa two common
chemical products should be avoided.Performance and Characteristics of Nano Particles Based High Explosives 
Karol Woirin Alban Combe Yann Guguin and Claude Roux 
 Herakles SAFRAN group Le Bouchet Research Center 
9 rue Lavoisier 91710 Vert-le-Petit France 
Abstract.  The  present  paper  points  out  the  recent  results  Herakles  obtained  and  a 
comparison  of  nano  structured  compositions  with  a  reference  is  shown.  Initiation  tests 
have  been  performed  on  the  compositions  with  nano  particles  of  RDX  in  order  to 
highlight a significant effect of very fine particles on critical diameter and run distances to 
detonation measured with the wedge test. Reactivity tests have also been realized in order 
to  examine  the  effect  of  aluminum  nano  particles  on  ballistic  performance  through  the 
cylinder  test.  Comparisons  with  numerical  simulations  allowed  us  to  determine  the 
amount of reacted aluminum during the expansion of detonation products. 
performed  on  different  compositions  with  nano 
Then it has been experimentally demonstrated 
that  the  introduction  of  metallic  particles  able  to 
react  with  air  such  as  aluminum  particles 
significantly increases blast effects cf. 4. In order 
to enhance the amount of reacted particles and the 
blast  effects  it  seems  interesting  to  increase  the 
specific area of aluminum particles by decreasing 
their  size.  In  order  to  examine  the  effect  of  nano 
aluminum  particles  on  ballistic  performances 
cylinder tests have also been realized. 
particles based compositions have been formulated 
on  the  basis  of  a  reference  composition  called 
Explosive A which is a Plastic Bonded eXplosive 
containing  RDX  Ammonium 
For  several  years  Le  Bouchet  Research 
Centre France of Herakles SAFRAN group has 
been studying the influence of aluminum and RDX 
particle  size  on  sensitivity  and  performance  of 
High Explosives HE. Nowadays effects of nano 
literature  survey  has  shown 
including coarse particles attributed to the smaller 
defects they contain cf. 1 2 3. In that  way the 
introduction of nano particles of RDX seems to be 
an interesting way to decrease the high explosives 
sensitivity. In order to highlight a significant effect 
of very  fine particles on critical diameter and run 
distances  to  detonation  wedge  tests  have  been 
embedded  in  an  inert  binder.  The  following  table 
summarizes the studied compositions. 
Impact  test  the  sample  to  be  tested  is 
confined  in  a  steel  device  composed  of 
two  cylinders  placed  inside  a  centering 
ring.  By  modifying  the  drop  mass  and 
height  it  is  possible  to  vary  the  energy 
delivered  to  the  sample  from  1  to  50.1 
Joule. Thanks to a Bruceton Method it is 
possible to estimate the energy leading to 
50  of positive results. 
Table 1. Studied explosive compositions 
 wt.   wt.   wt.   wt. 
As  we said earlier the reference composition 
is  a  Plastic  Bounded  eXplosive  PBX  containing 
among  others  coarse  RDX  about  100  m  and 
coarse  aluminum  about  60  m.  Explosive  B 
contains  25    of  nano  RDX  median  diameter  is 
about  900  nm.  Explosive  C  contains  12    of 
nano aluminum median diameter about 100 nm. 
Explosive  D  contains  both  25    of  nano  RDX 
and 12  of nano aluminum. 
We  have  seen  that  all  the  coarse  aluminum 
from  Explosive  A  has  been  replaced  by  nano 
aluminum.  Nevertheless  only  half  part  of  coarse 
RDX  has  been  substituted  by  nano  RDX  because 
of  feasibility  constraints.  Indeed  for  nano  RDX 
rates higher than 25  it was impossible to shape 
the formulated compositions because of their high 
viscosity.  The  following  figure  shows  Explosive 
B during mixing phase. 
Fig. 1. Pictures of Explosive B during fabrication
left  during  mixing  phase  right  during  pouring 
-  Friction  test  the  sample  to  be  tested  is 
placed on a fixed porcelain plate. Another 
porcelain  plate  is  moved  once  only 
backwards  and  forwards  beneath 
porcelain  peg.  The  maximum  applied 
loading  is  360  N.  Thanks  to  a  Bruceton 
Method  it  is  possible  to  estimate  the 
solicitation  leading  to  50    of  positive 
-  Gap test this test is used to measure the 
ability of a substance under confinement 
in a steel tube to propagate a detonation 
by  subjecting  it  to  the  detonation  from  a 
booster charge. An inert barrier is placed 
sample to be tested. The thickness of the 
detonation threshold. 
the  booster  charge  and 
The  following  table  presents  the  relative 
results  obtained  on  explosives  B  C  and  D 
comparing to reference composition A. 
Table  2.  Influence  of  nano  particles  on  HE 
Influence of nano particles on HE sensitivity 
Based  on  compositions  A  B  C  and  D 
sensitivity of nano RDX and nano aluminum based 
high  explosives  has  been  investigated  with  the 
help of three kinds of safety tests 
In  the  previous  table  we  can  observe  a 
decrease  of  impact  and  friction  sensitivity  for 
explosive B containing nano RDX. This result is 
in  accordance  with  literature  cf.  1  3  5  because 
reduction  of  RDX  particles  size  seems  to  reduce 
Unlike  explosive  B  no  influence  of  nano 
aluminum  has  been  observed  on  sensitivity  of 
explosive  C.  This  result  is  also  quite  expected 
because  we  admit  that  aluminum  particles  do  not 
take part in initiation phenomena. 
Concerning  explosive  D  with  both  nano 
RDX  and  nano  aluminum  we  could  expect  a 
decrease of impact and friction sensitivity such as
explosive  B.  In  fact  we  observed  a  decrease  of 
impact  sensitivity  but  an  increase  of  friction 
sensitivity. This result deserves to be confirmed. 
Finally  neither  influence  of  nano  RDX  nor 
nano  aluminum  has  been  observed  on  gap  test 
results  for  all  studied  compositions.  This  result 
could  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  high  pressure 
initiation  seems  to  be  driven  by  coarse  particles 
and  because  all  the  tested  compositions  contain 
coarse  particles  of  RDX  we  have  seen  no 
significant difference with the gap test. 
Influence of nano RDX on HE initiation 
So far we have seen that nano aluminum had 
no  influence  on  HE  sensitivity  while  nano  RDX 
seems  to  decrease  it.  In  this  part  we  focus  on 
initiation phenomena and the effects of nano RDX 
on Shock to Detonation Transition SDT kinetics 
of  HE.  Through  that  way  the  wedge  test  is 
Wedge Test Presentation 
The  wedge  test  aims  to  characterize  the 
propagation  of  a  shock  wave  and  the  shock  to 
detonation  transition  in  a  sample  of  energetic 
material.  By  extension 
establishment of the pop-plot diagram which links 
the  run  distance  to  detonation  to  the  generated 
following  one  a  planar  shock  is  induced  in  the 
sample  to  be  tested  using  an  aluminum  plate 
projected by an explosive. The propagation of the 
shock  wave  and  the  transition  to  detonation  are 
monitored over time along the inclined faces of the 
sample using a streak camera. In this arrangement 
the  thickness  of  the  projected  plate  is  always  the 
same  which  implies  that  the  shock  duration  is 
almost identical for all tests. The plate thickness is 
designed  so  that  the  shock  level  is  sufficiently 
sustained before the rarefaction waves arrived. The 
thickness  of  the  explosive  plate  drives  the  impact 
velocity  of  the  plate  and  therefore  the  pressure 
level on the tested sample. The following pictures 
present the wedge test. 
Fig.  2.  Pictures  of  experimental  set  up  of  wedge 
The recording obtained with the streak camera 
is analyzed as shown in figure 3. 
theoretically  calculated 
according  to  the  impact  velocity  and  Hugoniot 
curves are then plotted in a graph as a function of 
run  distances  to  detonation  determined  with  the 
streak camera. The obtained curve is called Popplot. cf. 6. 
explosive  B  is  less  sensitive  than  the  reference 
between 6 and 12 GPa. 
the  range  of  pressure 
Curves plotted for explosives A and B may 
intersect  at  different  pressure  levels  and  may 
present a sensitivity inversion cf. 5. Nonetheless 
extrapolation at higher or lower pressure seems to 
be  quite  ambitious  especially  because  only  few 
experimental  points  are  available.  The  sensitivity 
inversion  deserves  to  be  confirmed  by  further 
investigation in the low and high pressure ranges. 
In  order  to  compare  the  results  we  obtained 
with  compositions  known  to  be  insensitive  we 
added on the previous chart the pop-plot diagram 
of  a  NTO  based  composition  46    weight  NTO 
Profile 1 Explosive A
Profile 2 Explosive A
Profile 1 Explosive B
Profile 2 Explosive B
Run distance to detonation mm
Fig.  5.  Pop-plot  diagrams  of  explosives  A  B 
and a NTO based explosive. 
According  to  the  previous  figure  at  high 
pressure levels higher than 8 GPa explosive B is 
less  sensitive  than  compositions  known  to  be 
insensitive such as the NTO based formulations. 
The  results  we  obtained  are  in  accordance 
with  common  references.  In  fact  Moulard  et  al. 
cf. 5 showed in 1986 the effect of RDX particle 
size  on  the  sensitivity  of  PBX  formulations.  Two 
formulations  were  tested  with  the  wedge  test  the 
first one contains coarse RDX about 140 m and 
the  second  one  contains  fine  RDX  about  6  m. 
The following figures show the Pop-plot diagrams 
Stable detonation start
Stable detonation start
from pyrotechnic flashes
from pyrotechnic flashes
Fig. 3. Example of typical streak camera recording 
and associated analysis. 
Experimental Results 
As we said earlier only explosives A and B 
have  been  tested  with  the  wedge  test  to  highlight 
the  effects  of  nano  RDX  on  high  explosives 
initiation  phenomena.  Pop-plot  diagrams  of 
explosives  A  and  B  are  presented  on  the  chart 
Profile 1 Explosive A
Profile 2 Explosive A
Profile 1 Explosive B
Profile 2 Explosive B
Run distance to detonation mm
Fig.  4.  Pop-plot  diagrams  of  explosives  A  and 
the  previous  figure  we  can  see  a 
significant  effect  of  nano  RDX  on  SDT  kinetics. 
Indeed  we  can  observe  an  increase  of  run 
distances  to  detonation  of  about  40    for  nano 
RDX  based  composition  B.  This  result  means 
that  explosive  B  needs  more  time  to  transit  to 
detonation  comparing  to  explosive  A  for  the 
same  shock  pressure  level.  We  can  say  that 
of coarse and fine formulations tested by Moulard 
Cylinder Test Presentation 
To observe the influence of the nano particles 
on  HE  reactivity  we  generally  use  the  cylinder 
test.  The  objective  of  the  cylinder  test  is  to 
measure  the  ballistic  performances  of  a  high 
explosive  and  also  to  determine  the  equation  of 
state  of  the  detonation  products  by  measuring  the 
expansion velocity of a copper cylinder walls. 
The  sample  to  be  tested  is  introduced  into  a 
copper  cylinder  and  ignited  with  an  adapted 
pyrotechnic  device.  The  measurement  of  the  wall 
expansion  is  achieved  through  a  streak  camera 
with  two  pyrotechnic  flashes  and  two  Fresnel 
lenses. A second measurement is made by using a 
VISAR  system  Velocity  Interferometer  System 
for Any Reflector cf. 7 and 8 which provides an 
accurate  measurement  of  the  beginning  of  the 
expansion.  The  following  figures  present  the 
Fig. 7. Cylinder test set up. 
The  recording  film  obtained  with  the  streak 
camera is used to draw the cylinder expansion as a 
function of time. These profiles are fitted along a 
Fig. 6. Pop-plot diagrams of coarse and fine RDX 
based formulations presented by Moulard et al. 5. 
On the previous charts we can see that Shock 
to Detonation transition occurs much later for fine 
formulation comparing to coarse formulation. The 
left-hand  chart  shows  the  experimental  points 
measured  during  the  wedge  test  with  a  plate 
impacting  at  1500  ms.  The  run  distance  to 
detonation  for  the  coarse  formulation  is  about  12 
mm  while  the  transition  for  the  fine  formulation 
occurs at 16  mm  which  means an increase of run 
distance  to  detonation  of  about  30  .  The  righthand  chart  is  the  pop-plot  diagram  of  the  tested 
formulations  and  like  explosives  A  and  B 
compositions  with  fine  RDX  particles  are  less 
sensitive  than  compositions  with  coarse  RDX 
The  results  Moulard  showed  in  1986  and  the 
results  we  obtained  during  our  study  could  be 
explained  by  a  chemical  decomposition  of  the 
solid  explosive  starting  much  later  behind  the 
shock front for fine RDX based formulations. 
Influence of nano Particles on HE Reactivity 
In  the  last  part  we  have  seen  the  effect  of 
nano RDX on initiation phenomena. Now we are 
going to see what the effect of nano aluminum and 
nano  RDX  on  HE  reactivity  is.  In  this  way  the 
cylinder  test  is  first  described  and  then  the 
experimental results are discussed. 
hyperbola  cf.  9.  The  material  velocity 
determined from the radial velocity by taking into 
account  the  lifting  angle  of  the  tube  during  its 
Experimental Results 
Explosives  A  B  C  and  D  have  been 
test.  By  comparing 
explosives A and B and explosives C and D 
we  can  analyze  the  influence  of  nano  RDX  on 
explosives reactivity. The following charts present 
the expansion velocity of the copper cylinder wall 
versus  time  for  compositions  A  and  B  and  C 
Comparing explosives A and C and B and 
influence  of  nano 
D  we  can  observe 
aluminum on explosives reactivity. The following 
charts present the expansion velocity of the copper 
cylinder wall versus time for compositions A and 
Fig.  9.  Expansion  velocity  measured  with  the 
cylinder test for explosives A B C and D. 
On  the  previous  charts  no  effect  of  nano 
aluminum  is  observed.  According  to  the  thermo 
chemical  theory  nano  aluminum  with  a  larger 
specific area may lead to an increase of the amount 
of  reacted  particles  and  numerical  simulations 
aluminum  leads  to  an  increase  of  expansion 
velocity of the cylinder wall. The following figure 
presents  results  from  numerical  simulations  of 
cylinder  test  performed  for  0  25  50  75  and  100 
 of reacted aluminum. 
increased  amount  of 
Fig.  8.  Expansion  velocity  measured  with  the 
cylinder test for explosives A B C and D. 
As  expected  nano  RDX  has  no  significant 
influence  on  cylinder  expansion  velocity  in  both 
studied  cases.  The  hypothesis  explaining  these 
results  is  that  all  the  RDX  particles  have  reacted 
before the cylinder expansion whatever their size. 
This means that RDX particle size has no effect on 
Calculation 0 Reacted Aluminium
Calculation 25 Reacted Aluminium
Calculation 50 Reacted Aluminium
Calculation 75 Reacted Aluminium
Calculation 100 Reacted Aluminium
with  nano  aluminum  based  compositions  that 
could be explained by two  main reasons the  first 
reason is that the too large difference between the 
size  of  AP  and  aluminum  particles  may  avoid  a 
good  reaction  the  second  reason  is  that  the 
alumina  layer  around  nano  aluminum  particles  is 
too  important  and  may  delay  the  aluminum 
Fig. 10. Numerical simulations of cylinder test for 
different amount of reacted aluminum. 
The  experimental  results  we  obtained  with 
nano  aluminum  based  compositions  could  be 
explained by two main reasons. First the too large 
difference between the size of AP particles about 
200 m and nano aluminum about 200 nm may 
avoid  a  good  reaction  of  aluminum  during 
anaerobic  phase  that  is  to  say  during  cylinder 
expansion.  Secondly  the  important  thickness  of 
the  aluminum  particle 
comparing  to  the  size  of  nano  aluminum  could 
lead  to  a  competition  between  alumina  layer 
melting and aluminum regression kinetics. 
their  rates.  To  support 
As  perspectives  for  this  study  a  numerical 
support  would  be  helpful 
understanding  of  initiation  phenomena  and  the 
influence of the different particles their repartition 
simulations  additional  wedge  tests  with  different 
repartition  of  RDX  particle  sizes  could  be 
performed.  Concerning 
deserve to be pursued to understand the influence 
of  the  alumina  layer  and  the  particle  size  on 
ballistic  performances.  Formulation  optimization 
could  be  then  possible.  Indeed  we  can  imagine 
testing  an  explosive  composition  containing  both 
nano  aluminum  and  nano  AP  or  using  nano 
aluminum without alumina layer. 
initiated  numerical 
Conclusions and Perspectives 
The  authors  would  like  to  thank  DGA  the 
French MoD for its financial support on this work.
test  on  explosives  A  and  B 
Concerning  the  results  we  obtained  with  the 
characterize  their  Shock  to  Detonation  Transition 
experimental  results  are 
in  accordance  with 
literature  and  especially  with 
Moulard  et  al.  Indeed  increased  run  distances  to 
detonation have been noticed for nano RDX based 
explosive corresponding to explosive B. 
Concerning  the  results  obtained  with  the 
cylinder  test  on  explosives  A  B  C  and  D 
performances we have seen that RDX particle size 
had  no  influence  on  reactivity.  This  result  was 
quite  expected  and  may  be  due  to  the  fact  that 
RDX  fully  reacts  before  the  cylinder  expansion. 
Besides  disappointing  results  have  been  obtained Oblique Interaction of Detonation with Inert  
Material Confinement The Effect on the Reaction Zone 
John B. Bdzil Mark Shortand James J. Quirk 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 
Abstract. A study is presented of the oblique interaction of both a step shock in unreacted 
explosive and a resolved reaction zone detonation with a rigid wedge. Two condensedphase  detonation  models  are  considered  1  a  polytropic  EOS  model  Aslam-BdzilStewart ABS and 2 a simple JWL EOS-based model Ignition  Growth IG. For the 
non-reactive polytropic model we find good agreement between shock-polar theory and 
direct  numerical  simulation  DNS  results  for  all  wedge  angles.  For  the  nonreactive 
Ignition  Growth model shock-polar theory agrees with DNS results only for the case 
of larger wedge angles. For smaller wedge angles a non-classical curved Mach reflection 
is observed reminiscent of von Neumann Mach reflection 5 which does not agree with 
three-shock polar theory. For small to moderate wedge angles our resolved reaction zone 
detonation simulations show very curved Mach stems and no obvious slip line for both 
models.  The  strong  influence  that  the  explosives  heat-release  rate  has  on  streamline 
curvature  explains  the  difference  between  the  nonreactive  and  resolved  reaction  zone 
During the oblique interaction of a detonation 
wave  with  an  explosiveinert  material  boundary 
the detonation reaction zone is altered as reflected 
waves  generated  by  the  interaction  enter  the 
reaction  zone.  The  leading-order  description  of 
this  interaction  is  given  by  shock-polar  theory  a 
theory for the flow at the point on the detonation 
shock  where  the  incident  shock  and  reflected 
waves  meet.  This  theory  is  developed  using  the 
EOS  that  describes  the  unreacted  explosive  and 
focuses on the possible matching of the interacting 
waves  consisting  of  a  collection  of  scale-free 
simple  waves  including  Hugoniot  shocks  and 
Prandtl-Meyer  rarefaction  fans.  The  angle 0
cid203390  between  the  incident  detonation  shock 
theory are the pressure cid1842cid2870 and streamline turning 
angle cid2870 achieved at the downstream state all in 
the  original  un-deflected  explosiveinert 
material  interface  is  the  control  variable  for  this 
theory.  The  variables  returned  by  shock-polar 
a reference frame attached to and moving with the 
intersection  point.  Details  of  the  shock-polar 
algebra  can  be  found  in  many  places  including 
reference  1.  A  schematic  example  is  shown  in 
In a two-material problem one material being 
the explosive and the other being an adjacent inert 
material separate shock polars are constructed for  
interaction of the ABS explosive detonation shock 
with Lexan. The shock speed for the undisturbed 
Fig. 2. The shock-polar diagram cid1842cid2870 vs. cid2870 for the 
incident  detonation  is  taken  to  be cid1830cid3041cid2869cid1830cid3004cid3011
0.8cid1855cid1865cid2020cid1871  and cid203315.  The  v-shaped  structure 
rarefaction states. The shock polar starting at cid1842cid2870
0cid28700 and going to the right is the shock polar 
yielding cid1842cid28702.5cid1839cid1854cid1853cid1870  for  the  case cid203875 
truncated  at  the  upper  plotting  limit  gives  the 
possible reflected shock states. The bottom of the 
v corresponds to the incident detonation vN state 
while the tail emanating from the bottom of the v 
and  going  off  to  the  right  gives  the  reflected 
for  Lexan.  The  intersection  of  the  Lexan  polar 
with  the  rarefaction  Prandtl-Meyer  fan  shows 
that the pressure is reduced from the detonations 
von Neumann vN state value.  
In the following sections of this paper we 
consider four distinct classes of models all for the 
rigid-wedge  problem  1  ABS  nonreactive  vNstate  shock  2  ABS  reactive  ZND-detonation  3 
IG nonreactive vN-state shock and 4 IG reactive 
ZND-detonation.  For  each  of  these  models  we 
explore  the  sensitivity  of  the  solutions  to  the 
interfaceincident shock angle cid2033. We compare the 
results  obtained  from  shock  polar  theory  with 
simulations of the problems. For the reactive  
the  oblique  shock 
Fig. 1. The shock-polar wave diagram is displayed 
reflected  wave  is  a  shock.  HE-0  labels  the 
quiescent explosive while HE-1 is the state behind 
the  incident  shock.  HE-2  is  the  state  behind  the 
reflected shock while IN-0 is the quiescent state in 
the  inert.  IN-1  is  the  state  behind  the  explosive 
induced shock in the inert.  
shock-polar diagram for the ABS explosive model 
the explosive and the inert. The solution point for 
the  interaction  is  the  common  pressure cid1842  and 
streamline  angle .  Displayed  in  Figure  2  is  the 
initial  density cid2025cid28682cid1859cid1855cid1855 cid1842cid28680 cid20113  and 
cid1830cid3004cid30110.8cid1855cid1865cid2020cid1871 interacting with Lexan  
initial  density cid2025cid28681.193cid1859cid1855cid1855 cid1847cid3046cid3435cid1855cid1865cid2020cid1871cid3415 cid3439
0.211.41cid1873cid3043  and Gruneisen Gamma 0.61. 
starting  at cid1876100  being  steady  and  1D  and 
moving  to  the  left  see  Table  I.  At cid18760  the 
angle cid203890cid2033  see  Fig.  3.  For  the  ABS 
crossing of the shock polar with the cid28700 axis  
     For  the  problem  that  we  study  and  report  on 
here the inert is assumed non-deformable rigid. 
Either  a  vN-state  step  shock  or  Zeldovich-von 
Neumann-Doering  ZND  detonation  is  taken  as 
model shock polar displayed in Fig. 2 a reflected 
shock  would  be  generated  corresponding  to  the 
detonation  encounters  a  rigid  planar  wedge  with 
which  yields  ZND  50  and  90  reaction-zone 
case  with  cid203830 
Fig.  3.  A  rigid  wedge  is  used  to  generate  an 
oblique interaction of detonation with the wall the 
shockdetonation  begins  at  the  right  boundary. 
When  the  inert  shock  problem  is  studied  the  vN 
state is  maintained the ABS vN particle velocity 
is  displayed  above.  When  a  resolved  reaction 
zone  detonation  is being  modeled  the  CJ state  is 
imposed at the right boundary not shown.  
models the reaction rate has the form  
 cid1870cid1853cid1872cid1857cid1863cid3435cid3627cid2025cid2025cid2868cid3415 1.25cid3627cid34391cid2019cid3092  
where typically we set cid20211 and cid18631.6487cid2020cid1871 
lengths  of  cid1876cid3090cid2880cid2868.cid28730.45cid1855cid1865 
and  cid1876cid3090cid2880cid2868.cid2877
2.05cid1855cid1865. In our reaction-depletion order study we 
explore  a  wide  range  of  values  for cid2021  under  the 
same for all cases. The initial state is taken as cid1842cid2868
0 and cid1846cid2868298cid1837. The ABS model uses the same 
scaled  specific  volume  is cid1848cid2025cid2868cid2025cid3415   and  the 
 cid1831cid1839cid1854cid1853cid1870cid3030cid3030cid3030cid3030 cid3017cid3023cid3082cid2879cid2869cid1869cid2019 .     
cid1831cid3036cid4672cid1839cid1854cid1853cid1870cid3030cid3030cid3030cid3030cid4673cid1831cid2868cid3036cid3017cid3023cid3284cid2939cid3284  
The IG model uses separate EOSs for reactant and 
product  phases  with  the  mixture  EOS  obtained 
using  ideal  mixing  and  pressure  and  temperature 
equilibrium  between  the  phases.  The  internal 
EOS for both reactants and products for which the 
constraint that the ZND half-reaction length is the 
The  EOS  parameters  for  the  ABS  model  are 
displayed in Table I while those for the IG model 
Table I. ABS parameters for PBX 9502.  
cid1827cid3036cid4672cid3023cid3284cid2939cid3284 cid2869cid3019cid3117cid3284cid4673cid1857cid2879cid3019cid3117cid3284cid3023cid3284cid1828cid3036cid4672cid3023cid3284cid2939cid3284 cid2869cid3019cid3118cid3284cid4673cid1857cid2879cid3019cid3118cid3284cid3023cid3284.  
cid2025cid2868cid1859cid1855cid1855 cid2011 cid1869cid1839cid1854cid1853cid1870 cid1830cid3004cid3011cid1855cid1865cid2020cid1871 cid1842cid3049cid3015
cid1842cid3004cid3011
cid1839cid1854cid1853cid1870 
cid1839cid1854cid1853cid1870 
The products cid3036 bottom table row was adjusted to 
give the measured cid1830cid3004cid30110.78cid1855cid1865cid2020cid1871. The reactant 
cid2025cid2868cid1859cid1855cid1855  cid1827cid3036cid1839cid1854cid1853cid1870  cid1828cid3036cid1839cid1854cid1853cid1870 
cid1844cid2870cid3036 
cid1844cid2869cid3036 
cid1831cid2868cid3036cid1839cid1854cid1853cid1870cid1855cid1855cid1855cid1855 
cid1829cid3049cid3036cid1839cid1854cid1853cid1870cid1837   cid1842cid3049cid3015cid3004cid3011 
2.49cid1831cid2879cid2873 
1.0cid1831cid2879cid2873 
JWL top table row was recalibrated to move the 
crossing of the reactants and products Hugoniots 
for the steady-state CJ wave to above 1.1 Mbar.  
Table  II.  Recalibrated  IG  PBX  9502  parameters. 
Nonreactive ABS Model  
Shock-Polar Theory Predictions  
The shock-polar theory predicts regular shock 
using the loss of the deflection angle condition to 
predict the onset of irregular reflection. The shock 
polar for this case is shown in Fig. 4. For wedge 
reflection  for  wedge  angles  greater  than 62.75 
angles less than 62.75 the reflected-shock polar 
62.75 we propose that for this self-similar flow 
cannot satisfy the zero streamline angle condition 
that  must  be  enforced  at  the  surface  of  the  rigid 
wedge.  To  proceed  for  wedge  angles  less  than 
Mach  reflection  is  established  and  centered  at  a 
triple  point  that  moves  away  from  the  wall  and 
along  a  straight  line.  In  that  case  we  move  to  a 
reference frame defined by the triple point for our 
shock  polar  calculations.  The  geometry  for  the 
Mach reflection can be obtained by interpreting the 
inert-region  shock  in  Fig.  1  as  the  Mach  shock. 
Displayed in Fig. 5 are the shock- 
shock-polar  diagram 
describes possible reflected-shock states while the 
nonreactive  ABS  model  with  the  incident  shock 
being square-topped and supported and traveling at 
cid1830cid3041cid2869cid1830cid3004cid30110.8cid1855cid1865cid2020cid1871  for  the  case  of  a  wedge 
angle cid203862.75.  The  teardrop  shaped  curve 
curve  beginning  at cid1842cid3049cid3015  and  moving  down  and  to 
shock pressure  is  the cid1842cid3049cid3015  value given  in Table  I. 
Since  the  streamline  turning  angle cid2870  must  be 
cid28700  at  the  wedge  surface  this  is  the  smallest 
polars  for  a 44  and  a 15  wedge  including  the 
wedge  angle  for  which  we  can  support  regular 
the  right  is  the  Prandtl-Meyer  fan.  The  incident 
polar  for  the  Mach  stem.  The  value  used  for  the 
angle of the triple-point line was obtained from the 
simulation results displayed in the next subsection. 
Next  we  compare  these  predictions  with  the 
simulation results. 
The  ABS  model  is  an  Euler  equationbased  model.  Two-dimensional  solutions  to  the 
nonreactive  model  were  simulated  using 
lagrange-eulerian  ALE-based  code 
ALE3D 4. ALE provides the enhanced accuracy 
of a lagrangian algorithm with frequent remapping  
for  a  square-topped 
Fig.  5.  Shock  polars  for  the  nonreactive  ABS 
supported  and  traveling  at cid1830cid3041cid2869cid1830cid3004cid30110.8cid1855cid1865
cid2020cid1871  for  the  case  of  wedge  angles cid203844  top 
and cid203815 bottom see Fig. 4. The Mach-stem 
cid28700 axis. Recall that cid28700 corresponds to a 
cid2038cid3046cid3039cid3036cid3043cid2879cid3039cid3036cid3041cid3032cid2038cid3014cid2870. 
streamline angle aligned with the triple-point line 
intersection  of  the  two  shock  polars  defines  the 
Mach-stem  pressure  which  are  1.62  Mbar  and 
0.80 Mbar respectively. 
shock  is  the  curve  that  begins  and  ends  on  the 
to  a  eulerian  grid  to  reduce  mesh  distortion.  A 
staggered  mesh  update  algorithm  is  used  along 
with artificial viscosity for shock capturing. In this 
formulation  energy  conservation  is  not  assured. 
For  our  wedge  simulations  a  grid  is  used  that 
aligns with the wedge and other boundaries which 
enhances  the  application  of  boundary  conditions 
and accuracy. Since ALE3D uses shock capturing 
which can lead to O1 errors in the solution near 
shocks the solutions are likely no more than firstorder  accurate  in  the  mesh  spacing  dx  locally. 
Our simulations use cid1856cid1876cid1856cid18770.05cid1855cid1865. 
Simulation  of  the  75-degree  wedge  cid203315 
The  wedge  geometry  is  displayed  in  Fig.  3 
the  boundary  and  initial  conditions  have  already 
been described in section 1. Since the nonreactive 
ABS model has no intrinsic scale we expect that 
the solutions should be self-similar and the flows 
should  become  quasi-steady  relatively  quickly. 
finds  regular  reflection  and  a  pressure  of  2.55 
Mbar at the reflected shockwall intersection. This 
compares well with the shock polar pressure of 2.5 
Mbar shown in Fig. 2. Simulation of the 60-degree 
wedge  problem  shows  a  slowly  growing  Mach 
stem  which  agrees  with  the  loss  of  regular 
reflection  predicted  by  the  shock-polar  theory  of 
cid203862.75.  Displayed  in  Figs.  6  and  7  are 
snapshots  of  the  density  palette  30  pressure 
contours and a 1D plot of pressure along the slip 
line  for  the  44-degree  and  30-degree  wedge 
problems respectively.  
       The simulation and shock polar results are in 
very good agreement for the inert ABS model. We  
trajectories  measured  from  snapshots  of 
simulations are close to straight lines and given by 
cid1877cid1853cid1854cid1876 see Table III. 
In summary the inert ABS model shows 
a relatively simple shock-reflection structure. The 
shock-polar theory predicts the observed transition 
from regular to Mach reflection. Given the triplepoint 
pressures well and over the entire range of wedge 
angles showing Mach reflection. The Mach shock 
appears as a nearly straight line for this model. We 
suspect that the special value of adiabatic gamma 
cid20113  plays  some  role  in  this.  Additionally  the 
shock-Mach number for these flows is very high. 
Reactive ABS Model  
Since shock-polar theory combines scale- 
free simple waves to describe the shock-reflection 
problem it is clear that no such theory is available 
for the reaction-zone scale containing reactive  
Figs.  6.  A  snapshot  of  the  density  palette  and 
pressure  contours  top  and  the  pressure  profile 
along  the  slip  line  bottom  for  the  44-degree 
simulation  196.9cid2020cid1871.  The  shock  polar  prediction 
for  the  Mach-stem  pressure  of  1.62  Mbar  agrees 
favorably  with  the  maximum  pressure  displayed 
bottom.  Note  that  the  Mach  stem  is  a  nearly 
ABS model of detonation. To predict such things 
as the transition from regular to Mach reflection of 
detonation  one  typically  uses  the  shock-polar 
theory  for  unreacted  explosive  described  in  the 
previous  section.  This  is  based  on  the  argument 
that  the  detonation  shock  controls  the  reflection 
process. What we show in this section is that  
Figs.  7.  A  snapshot  of  the  density  palette  and 
pressure  contours  top  and  the  pressure  profile 
along  the  slip  line  bottom  for  the  15-degree 
simulation 221.6cid2020cid1871.  The shock polar prediction 
for  the  Mach-stem  pressure  of  0.80  Mbar  agrees 
favorably  with  the  maximum  pressure  displayed 
bottom. The Mach-stem shock shows a slight bit 
of curvature for this case. 
although  this  strategy  may  work  for  cases  with 
large  wedge  angles  the  detonation  heat-release 
rate  has  a  strong  influence  on  the  observed 
behavior  for  small  wedge  angles  those  being  the 
angles where Mach reflection is observed.  
Table III. The observed triple-point trajectories for 
inert  ABS  model  simulations.  The  slopes  of  the 
triple-point  trajectories  are  used  as  input  for  the 
Mach stem shock-polar calculations.  
cid1853cid1855cid1865 
Simple-Depletion Reaction Rate Simulations  
      The  details  of  the  reactive  ABS  model  were 
described in the previous sections. All we need to 
add  here  is  to  say  that  a  ZND  wave  with  CJ 
support is established in the straight section of the 
wedge geometry before the detonation encounters 
the  oblique  surface  of  the  wedge.  Therefore  the 
shock  state  of  the  incident  detonation  is  identical 
to the state of the incident shock in the nonreactive 
ABS  simulations.  In  this  subsection  we  set  the 
reaction-depletion  order  to cid20211  the  case  of 
simple depletion and study the effect that wedge 
angle has on the reflection process.  
       Displayed  in  Figs.  8  and  9  are  the  density 
palette  plots  over  which  pressure  contours  are 
superimposed for the cases of a 60 44 30 and 15degree  wedge  at 
simulation.  The  density  gradient  following  the 
incident  shock  can  be  used  to  estimate  the 
reaction-zone  length.  The  simulation  for  the  60degree wedge problem shows regular reflection is 
lost  in  the  reactive  simulation  at  about  the  same 
wedge angle as the loss occurs for the nonreactive 
simulation.  So  in  both  cases  the  onset  of  Mach 
reflection  agrees  with  the  shock-polar  theory 
detachment  condition.  The  44-degree  wedge 
problem shows a much weakened slip line which 
vanishes in the 30-degree wedge problem. For the 
15-degree  wedge  problem  there  is  neither  a  slip 
line  nor  a  reflected  shock  evident  in  the  reaction 
zone  although  the  flow  behind  the  Mach  stem 
shows  a  region  of  significantly  higher  pressure 
than exists behind the incident shock. 
      The  smoother  flows  witnessed  in  the  reactive 
ABS simulations as compared with the nonreactive  
 cid2847cid1318cid4652cid4652cid1318cid4672cid3048cid3300cid3048cid3299cid4673cid3427cid3435cid3048cid4652cid4652cid1318cid3047cid1318cid3439cid3048cid3300cid2878cid3048cid4652cid4652cid1318cid3041cid4652cid1318cid3048cid3299cid3431
cid3048cid3299cid3118cid3048cid4652cid4652cid1318cid3041cid4652cid1318cid3118cid2879cid3030cid3118cid1841.  
cid3435cid3048cid4652cid4652cid1318cid3047cid1318cid3439cid3082cid2879cid2869cid3044cid3019
                                                                         4  
Fig. 8. The density palette plot with superimposed 
pressure  contours  for  the  case  of  a  60-degree 
wedge top and a 44-degree wedge bottom.  
simulations are a consequence of the action of the 
detonation  heat-release 
deflection. For the smaller wedge angles the heat- 
release rate dominates the shock process in turning  
the streamlines. Displayed in Eq. 4 is the equation 
for  streamline  turning  in  the  limit  of  a  quasisteady 
incident  shock-attached 
reference  frame  and  for  the  reactive  ABS  model  
Fig. 9. The density palette plot with superimposed 
pressure  contours  for  the  case  of  a  30-degree 
wedge  top  and  a  15-degree  wedge  bottom. 
These plots extend over a somewhat larger spatial 
region compared to the region covered in Fig. 8.  
Here cid1873cid3051  is  the  x-component  and cid1873cid3052  is  the  yattached  frame cid1866cid4652cid1318  and cid1872cid1318  are  unit  vectors  normal 
and tangent to the shock cid2011 is the ABS polytropic 
constant cid1869  is  the  thermicity  of  the  reaction cid1844  is 
the reaction rate cid1855 is the sound speed and  is the 
component  of  velocity  in  the  incident  shock
432
contribution to streamline curvature.  
Displayed in Fig. 10 is a density palette plot on 
which  pressure  contours  are  overlaid  for  the  30
vorticity generated by the shock when it is curved. 
Thus  for  flows  where  there  is  a  tangential 
component of the particle velocity along the shock 
heat-release  acts  to  curve  the  streamlines.  The 
cid1841 shock generated vorticity makes only a small 
Simulation Results for different cid2021  
degree wedge problem and for depletion order cid2021
5 at the ending time of the simulation. Recall that 
half-reaction  zone  length  cid1876cid3090cid2880cid2868.cid28730.45cid1855cid1865  was 
the  same  as  for  the cid20211  case.  Comparing  with 
the cid20211  case  displayed  in  Fig.  9  top  we  find 
that the slip line and reflected shock for cid20215 are 
a higher depletion order spreads the energy release 
over  a  long  weakly  energetic  reaction-zone  tail. 
The reaction rate constant was adjusted so that the 
more prominent. So from the examples in this and 
the previous subsection one can witness the strong 
influence that the detonations heat-release rate has 
on both streamline turning and on the structure of 
the detonation reaction zone. 
      The shock Mach number is essentially infinite 
for  the  ABS  model  since  the  upstream  sound 
speed is nearly zero compared with the detonationstate  variables.  The  Mach  number  plays  a 
significant role in oblique shock reflection. In the 
next section we consider the JWL EOS used in the 
Ignition    Growth  IG  detonation  model  for 
which the shock Mach number has an cid18411 value 
to see what affect that has on the structure of Mach 
Nonreactive IG JWL Model  
Comparison of IG Simulations with Shock Polars 
      Here  we  make  the  same  ansatz  for  treating 
Mach  reflection  in  shock-polar  theory  as  we  did 
for the nonreactive ABS model. That is we use the 
simulation to define the reference frame for Mach 
reflection.  The  fitting  coefficients  that  define  the 
linear  trajectories cid1877 cid31cid1854cid1876  are  listed  in 
trajectory  measured 
Table IV. The results displayed in Fig. 11 indicate 
that classical three-shock Mach reflection is only 
observed  for  wedge  angles  of  40-degrees  and 
greater. This is in contrast to the nonreactive ABS 
model where three-shock Mach reflection is  
depletion order cid20215. 
Fig. 10. The density palette plot on which is 
superimposed pressure contours for the case of 
observed  for  all  wedge  angles  below  the  angle 
shock  detachment  occurs. 
Displayed in Fig. 12 are the rho palette on which 
are overlaid pressure contours at the ending time 
of the simulation for the 40-degree top and 30degree bottom wedge problems respectively. 
Table IV. The observed triple-point trajectories for 
inert  IG  model  simulations.  The  slopes  of  the 
triple-point  trajectories  are  used  as  input  for  the 
Mach stem shock-polar calculations.   
      Comparing  the  predictions  of  the  three-shock 
polar theory with simulation we find that the 40degree  wedge  case  shows  reasonable  agreement 
the  30-degree  wedge 
problem  there  is  no  three-shock  polar  solution. 
The 30-degree simulation shows the appearance of 
a  rarefaction  fan  that  acts  to  reduce  the  higher 
pressures  seen  behind  the  stem  to  the  relatively 
cid1853cid1855cid1865 
lower pressures now found at the reflected shock. 
The  slip  line has become  very  weak with only  a 
slight  density  difference  being  observed  between 
Correspondingly  the  Mach  shock  now  shows 
definite  curvature  near  where  it  intersects  the 
incident shock. For the inert IG model which has 
an cid18411  shock  Mach  number  we  see  a  non- 
classical Mach reflection unlike anything we saw 
for any of the inert ABS wedge problems. We do 
not yet have a theoretical explanation for this nonclassical  possibly  von  Neumann-type  Mach 
Weve  performed  a  number  of  simulations  with 
the  reactive  IG  model  described  in  Table  II.  For 
smaller  wedge  angles  we  see  the  very  curved 
Mach  reflections  with  the  Mach  shock  blending 
smoothly  into  the  incident  shock  much  like  we 
saw  for  the  reactive  ABS  model.  We  see  this 
behavior  as  long  as  the  Mach-stem  pressures  do 
not  exceed  the  pressure  where  the  reactants  and 
products  Hugoniots  cross  a  crossing  occurs  at   
1.1  Mbar.  At  larger  wedge  angles  the  pressures 
can  exceed  this  1.1  Mbar  threshold.  Then  we 
observe both bizarre Mach and regular reflections 
that contain two reflected shocks etc. We believe 
that such double reflected shocks are related to the 
Hugoniot  crossing  artifact.  We  are  developing 
models  and  calibrations  that  realistically  predict 
Mach  reflection  for  condensed-phase  resolved 
reaction zone detonations.  
In  this  paper  weve  explored  oblique  detonation 
reflection off of a rigid wedge for two models of 
condensed-phase explosives. Both the gamma-law 
EOS based ABS and JWL EOS based IG models 
were studied. The scale-free unreacted EOS shock 
reflection  problem  shows  very  different  behavior 
for the ABS and IG models. For the ABS model 
three-shock theory describes the nonreactive shock 
reflection  problem  accurately 
transition from regular to Mach reflection and the  
See the caption to Fig. 5 for details. The Mach
 
Fig. 11. The shock-polar diagram for the inert IG 
model  with  the  incident  shock  being  square
topped  and  supported  and  traveling  at cid1830cid3041cid2869
cid1830cid3004cid30110.78cid1855cid1865cid2020cid1871  for  the  case  of  wedge  angles 
cid203840 top and cid203830 bottom respectively. 
stem  pressure  is  about  1.05  Mbar  for cid203840 
indicated  for cid203830.  For  wedge  angles  greater 
while no three-shock based Mach-stem pressure is 
than  40-degrees  Mach  reflection  as  indicated  for 
condition is met. No three-shock Mach reflection 
is observed for angles less than 35-degrees.  
is  observed  until 
reflection problem for smaller wedge angles shows 
anomalous  behavior.  There  are  no  three-shock 
polar  solutions  and  the  transition  between  the 
Mach  and  incident  shocks  is  observed  to  be 
smooth  in  the  simulations.  The  smooth  Mach 
reflections  are  reminiscent  of  von  Neumann 
reflection  5  although  we  currently  have  no 
theoretical  description  for  the  scale-free  flow 
     When  the wedge  angles are  smaller  a  smooth 
and  rounded  transition  between  the  Mach  and 
incident  shocks  is  observed  for  both  resolved 
reaction zone models. There is no slip line and the 
reflected  shock  is  dispersed  in  the  reaction  zone. 
The action of the explosives heat-release rate on 
streamline turning explains why resolved reaction 
zone Mach reflection is unlike Mach reflection for 
nonreactive materials.  
Andy  Anderson  LLNL  provided  the  wedge 
conforming mesh used in the ALE3D simulations.   Unreacted Equations of State of Sylgard and Hexanitroazobenzene HNAB 
Determined by Ultrafast Time Domain Interferometry 
Brook A. Jilek Ian T. Kohl Darcie A. Farrow Junji Urayama Robert Knepper Gregg Radtke Sean 
P. Kearney Michael R. Armstrong Jonathan C. Crowhurst James Lewicki Kayla M. Coleman and 
Sandia National Laboratories 
Albuquerque NM 87185 USA 
Lawrence Livermore Laboratory 
Livermore CA 94550 USA 
Abstract.  We  present  an  ultrafast  optical  technique  for  measuring  the  shock  Hugoniot 
and shocked index of refraction of thin films of energetic materials before they react. The 
shock  Hugoniot  of  the  polymer  Sylgard  was  measured  with  Ultrafast  Time  Domain 
Interferometry  UTDI  over  a  range  of  pressures  from  9.7  GPa  to  13.9  GPa.  The  data 
agree to within 1 of the linear fit Us  1.57Up  1.70 kms to gas gun data in the LASL 
Shock  Hugoniot  Handbook.  The  Hugoniot  of  HNAB  is  measured  to  be  Us    2.70Up   
1.77  kms  over  a  range  of  pressures  from  8.8  GPa  to  15.1  GPa  if  we  assume  an 
unshocked index of refraction of 1.8.  
Equation-of-state EOS models are based in 
part on  shock Hugoniot  data. Ideal high  explosives 
HEs are characterized by rapid reaction kinetics 
which  make  unreacted  Hugoniot  measurements 
difficult because particle velocities in the shocked 
material must be measured before reactions occur. 
the  highest-pressure  measured 
Hugoniot  point  for  pentaerythritol 
PETN is 14.1 GPa1 which is less than half of the 
established Chapman-Jouget C-J chemical equilibrium 
pressure at detonation2. With the advent of ultrafast 
laser systems that launch picosecond ps rise-time 
diagnostics  researchers  have  access  to  greater 
temporal  and  spatial  resolution  than  gun-based 
shock  Hugoniot  experiments3.  Recent  density 
functional theory DFT modeling by Wixom and 
Mattsson  extend  the  PETN  Hugoniot  to  higher 
pressures beyond the C-J point. These DFT results 
agree  well  with  experiment  however  and  in 
general  additional  higher-pressure  experimental 
measurements  are  necessary  to  fully  validate 
Hexanitroazobenzene HNAB is an energetic 
material  with  properties  that  make  it  a  model 
system  to  study  the  effects  of  microstructure  on 
initiation. HNAB can be vapor-deposited as a fully 
temperature  it  crystallizes  into  a  dense  film 
99.4 TMD with nanometer-scale pores5. In the 
amorphous  state  it  shares  some  properties  with 
liquid  explosives  it  has  an  isotropic  molecular 
network  no  long  range  order  and  lacks  micronscale  pores  that  can  serve  to  nucleate  shock
If  kept  at 
initiation.  Unlike 
explosives  solid  explosives  like  HNAB  form 
much  stronger  intermolecular  bonds.  Detonation 
studies  may  be  conducted  on  crystalline  and 
amorphous  HNAB  to  elucidate  how  pores  and 
molecular  ordering  affect  the  shock  initiation 
Here  we  have  implemented  a  laser-based 
tabletop  diagnostic  Ultrafast  Time  Domain 
Interferometry  UTDI  originally  developed  by 
Benuzzi-Mounaix6 recently refined by Armstrong 
et al. at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
78 and closely related to work by Bolme et al. at 
Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory9.  The  method 
unreacted Hugoniot of a wide variety of materials 
including high explosives HEs. UTDI overcomes 
time-resolution  limitations  of  other  diagnostics 
such  as  Photon  Doppler  Velocimetry  PDV  and 
Velocity Interferometry System for Any Reflector 
VISAR by encoding temporal information within 
the spectrum of a probe pulse.  
high-throughput  measurements 
A  diagram  of  the  experimental  setup  is 
provided in Fig. 1. A broadband 25 nm full-width 
at half-max FWHM femtosecond pulse is chirped 
so  that  the  various  wavelengths  travel  different 
path  lengths  and  become  more  separated  in  time 
resulting  in  a  probe  pulse  that  is  300  or  more 
picoseconds FWHM in duration. One edge of a 
laser  pulse  is  clipped  in  the  beam  stretcher  to 
produce  a    10  ps  rise-time  profile.  This  chirped 
pulse  is  split  into  two  portions  a  higher  energy 
pulse to generate a shock within a target and a low 
energy pulse that propagates through a Michelson 
interferometer to form a pulse-pair with a relative 
time  separation  of  10  ps.  The  drive  pulse  is 
focused down to a  30 m spot on the substrate 
side of an aluminum target rapid ionization within 
impulsively  launches  a  shock  wave  that  travels 
through the Al and into a sample material. On the 
backside  of  the  ablator  the  probe  pulses  are 
focused to a  100 um spot to illuminate the entire 
break-out  area  including  unshocked  reference 
regions. An objective lens is selected to image the 
surface  of  the sample  onto  the  slit  of  an  imaging 
spectrometer.  A  CCD  camera  attached  to  the 
interference  pattern 
created  by  the  relative  path-length  differences 
between  corresponding  wavelengths  in  the  probe 
Fig. 1. UTDI setup. 
the  probe  pair  signals 
As  a  homodyne  interferometry  velocimeter 
UTDI  is  an  ultrafast  analog  of  the  VISAR10.  As 
time progresses the accumulated phase difference 
propagation    every  10  ps  -  of  the  metal  ablator 
relative to the shock front. A raw UTDI image is 
shown in Fig. 2. UTDI data are analyzed to yield 
the  ablator  or  piston  velocity  Up  the  shock 
velocity Us and the shocked index of refraction 
ns in the material. UTDI measurements are made 
over  a  range  of  shock  drive  pressures  to  develop 
the unreacted Us-Up Hugoniot. 
Fig. 2. Interferogram generated when probe pulse 
pair  interacts  with  shocked  material.  The  middle 
region is shocked. The top and bottom regions are 
unshocked  and  serve  as references  for  computing 
the difference in phase caused by motion of the 
ablator and shock wave.  
If  we  assume  a  steady-state  shock  entering  an 
unreacted  material  the  shock  wave  traveling  at 
speed Us  Up creates an expanding region where 
the  shocked  index  of  refraction  ns  exceeds  the 
unshocked  index  of  refraction  n0  as  in  Fig.  3 
below. Because there is an index mismatch at the 
location  of  the  shock  front  there  will  be  a 
reflection  at  that  location.  There  will  also  be  a 
stronger reflection from the ablator surface moving  
                      2 
Experimental Details 
Its crucial to accurately measure the duration 
of  the  chirped  beam  in  order  to  convert  the 
wavelength axis of the spectrometer to a time axis. 
This  will  be  used  to  determine  the  period  of 
oscillation in the canonical signal. The duration of 
the chirped pulse can be measured by overlapping 
amplifier with the chirped pulse and measuring the 
resultant  spectral 
interference  pattern  with  a 
spectrometer in a manner very similar to Temporal 
Analysis  by  Dispersing  a  Pair  Of  Light  E-fields 
TADPOLE11. A traditional TADPOLE measurement 
will  not  directly  measure  the  chirp  in  a  beam 
hundreds of ps long because the phase difference 
between  the  ps  pulse  and  the  fs  pulse  quickly 
grows  and  produces  fringes 
resolved with a spectrometer. Instead of making a 
direct TADPOLE measurement the delay between 
the  two  beams  is  changed  incrementally  and 
movement  can  be  seen  in  the  narrow  spectral 
region  in  the  interferogram  in  which  the  phase 
difference is small. A very accurate calibration of 
wavelength  to  time  is  achieved  by  plotting  the 
position of this feature in the spectrum as the delay 
between  the  probe  pair  and  the  pump  beam  the 
shock will arrive earlier or later in the spectrum of 
the  probe.  Plotting  the  wavelength  at  which  the 
phase  difference  reaches  a  certain  value  versus 
time delay in the two beams also leads to a good 
calibration of the pulsewidth of the chirped beam.  
Measurement of the pulse pair separation t 
to  get  correct  piston  and  shock 
velocities.  This  is  easily  accomplished  if  the 
spectrometer  has  a  good  wavelength  calibration. 
The  wavelength  axis  is  simply  converted  to  a 
Fig. 3. Physical model to describe reflections from 
the shock front and ablator surface. Only the firstorder reflections from the shock front and ablator 
are considered in the analysis. 
A  detailed  analysis  of 
accumulates from these two reflections is given in 
reference 8. A canonical UTDI trace with a steady 
shock will generate a plot of phase versus time that 
looks like Fig. 4 below.  
Fig. 4. Canonical UTDI trace of phase 
accumulated per unit of time equal to the probe 
pair separation. The offset m amplitude  
and period  are measured quantities used to 
determine Us Up and ns. 
Summarizing  the  analysis  in  reference  8  Us 
Up and ns are related to the offset m amplitude 
 and period  of the oscillations in the phase 
the  pulse  pair  separation  t  and 
unshocked index of refraction n0 by the following 
final  thermodynamic  states  of  the  material  using 
conservation  of  mass  and  momentum.  We  note 
that our experiment measures the piston speed not 
the  particle  speed  just  behind  shock  front  but  it 
has  been  shown  in  previous  work12  that  by 
assuming  the  particle  speed  is  the  same  as  the 
measured  piston  speed  the  measured  shockwave 
speed  will  correspond  to  the  known  Hugoniot  to 
better than 2 accuracy. 312  
The phase of the shocked region is computed 
row by row by taking the Fourier transform of the 
data  removing  the  components  not  centered  near 
the probe delay and inverse Fourier transforming 
back  to  the  spectral  domain.  The  phase  of  an 
unshocked reference region is subtracted from the 
shocked phase to get the phase due to ablator and 
shock wave motion.  
The  physical  model  to  which  the  data  are 
fitted requires a steady shock with constant piston 
and  shock  velocities  in  order  to  return  physically 
relevant  Hugoniot  data.  If  the  shock  imparted  to 
the  material  contains  an  elastic  precursor  of 
duration  comparable  to  that  of  the  experiment 
hundreds of ps the steady-state shock condition 
will not be met. It is always preferable to drive a 
shock with enough energy so that the plastic wave 
has  overtaken  the  elastic  wave  by  the  time  the 
shock  has  reached  the  ablator-film  interface  to 
minimize elastic precursors in the film. Though a 
plastic  wave  from  the  ablator  does  not  always 
ensure that we have only a plastic wave in the film 
due  to  impedance  mismatches  between  the  film 
and ablator and the material response of the film to 
stress an overdriven shock minimizes the time to 
reach  a  steady-state  pressure  in  the  film.  To 
understand  what  energy  ranges  are  needed  for 
launching  plastic  shock  waves  the  free-surface 
velocities  of  bare  aluminum  ablators  were 
measured with UTDI and shown below in Fig. 6.  
frequency  axis  by  dividing  the  speed  of  light  by 
the  wavelength  axis.  The  fringe  spacing  f  in 
frequency is related to the pulse pair separation t 
by  t1f.  Taking  the  Fourier  transform  across 
frequencies  is  particularly  helpful  in  finding  the 
probe  pair  separation.  Assuming  the  frequency 
axis is evenly spaced with N points you can create 
a Fourier Transform time axis by noting the range 
of frequencies on your axis from lowest to highest 
fmax  setting  the  spacing  of  points  on  the  time 
axis as being 1 fmax and making the axis N times 
this  long.  When  the  Fourier  transform  is  plotted 
against this new time axis the peaks at a non-zero 
time correspond to the probe pair separation. 
The  experimental  apparatus  is  the  same  as 
used in previous work 78  shown schematically in 
Fig.  5.  A  chirped  350  ps  duration  25  nm 
FWHM  spectral  width  800  nm  wavelength 
pump pulse is focused by a 2 cm focal length lens 
to  30  micron  FWHM  intensity  and  drives  a 
shock wave through a 1 micron thick Al ablator 
on  a  glass  cover 
Fig.  5.  A  schematic  cross  section  of 
experiment at the sample. 
On  the  probe  side  the  piston  interface  is 
imaged  onto  the  slit  of  an  imaging  spectrometer 
with  a  0.28  NA  microscope  objective  with  10x 
total  magnification  between  the  sample  and  the 
detector  and  the  ultimate  spatial  resolution  is  2 
m.  From  knowledge  of  the  particle  speed  just 
behind the shock front and the shockwave speed 
the  pressure  and  density  of 
compressed state can be derived from the RankineHugoniot equations which connect the initial and 
Fig.  8  below  plots  the  computed  Hugoniot 
points measured from UTDI at LLNL along with 
Hugoniots  from  gas  gun  data.  The  unreacting 
polymer  Sylgard  shows  good  agreement  with  the 
linear fit to the gas gun data1.  
Fig.  8.  Hugoniot  data  for  Sylgard  obtained  via 
UTDI at LLNL compared to gas gun data1 fit Us 
Fig. 9 below shows an example of how the data is 
fit  to  a  region  of  steady  shock  in  HNAB. 
To  calculate  shock  and  piston  speeds  this 
method  requires  the  index  of  refraction  of  the 
unshocked  material.  Although  the  initial  sample 
Fig. 6. Aluminum ablator velocities with differing 
pump energies. Data are from SNL. Lower energy 
shocks arrive later.  
To  derive  accurate  Hugoniot  data  from  the 
phase  data  we  always  choose  the  most  stronglydriven part of the sample and from that row of data 
we must select a region in time that exhibits steady 
shock propagation characterized by an offset that 
is relatively constant and an amplitude oscillation 
that  varies  as little  as  possible  for  more  than  one 
Fig.  7  below  shows  an  example  of  how  the 
data is fit to a region of steady shock in Sylgard. 
The sinusoid shows a good fit to the data when we 
allow the offset to change linearly.  
Fig. 7. Example of phase data from Sylgard taken 
at LLNL. The sinusoid and line show the portion 
of the phase to be fit to the model.  
Fig. 9. Phase data for HNAB and region used for 
fitting to the model. Data is from LLNL.  
converted to a crystalline form as demonstrated by 
observed birefringence in the probe. The material 
we  probed  was  comprised  of  the  HNAB  II 
polymorph  whose  indices  of  refraction  vary  with 
crystal orientation from 1.5 to 1.813. The films are 
randomly-oriented  polycrystals  so  the  average 
refractive  index  should  lie  somewhere  between 
those two values. Here we used 1.8 for the index 
of refraction. The Hugoniot of HNAB is presented 
Fig. 10 assuming an index of refraction of 1.8. 
As this is a critical parameter in the calculation of 
UP US and nS an actual measurement of the index 
of refraction for our sample would greatly increase 
confidence in the Hugoniot data. However such a 
measurement  was  not  available  at 
publication.  The  data  seem  to  lie  upon  a  line 
except  the  one  outlier  at  the  highest  piston 
velocity. The plot of phase data for this point was 
not  as  well-behaved  as  the  others  so  it  is  likely 
that a steady shock was not present and thus the 
physical  model  was  not  satisfied.  For  calculating 
the pressures generated the density of HNAB was 
taken to be 1.750 gcm3 as measured from flotation 
Fig. 10. HNAB Hugoniot for all shots ordered by 
pump energy. Data are from LLNL. 
  We eliminated the one outlier with the highest 
piston velocity from  
Fig. 10  above and  then ordered  all  the  remaining 
data  points  by  piston  velocity  binned  them  in 
groups of 5 and averaged the UP and US values by 
bin to create the Hugoniot 
with less scatter in Fig. 11 below. 
Fig. 11 HNAB Hugoniot from LLNL assuming n0 
 1.8. Us  2.70UP  1.77 kms. 
For  quantitative  comparisons  between  our 
data and Hugoniots from theory or fits to previous 
data  we  evaluate  a  mean  pairwise  difference 
where  H  a  continuous  function  is  a  theoretical 
Hugoniot  or  a  fit  to  previous  data  US  is  the 
corresponding  measured  piston  speed  and  the 
average is taken over measured data points. Mean 
pairwise  differences  larger  than  the  standard 
deviation  of  the  data  are  statistically  significant. 
Hugoniot  points  for  Sylgard  had  an  MPD  of  less 
than 1 from a linear fit to Sylgard data derived 
from  gas  gun experiments  which  is  less  than  the 
standard  deviation  of  the  gas  gun  data1  from  a 
linear fit 3.5. Here we measure the Hugoniot of 
a previously uncharacterized sample HNAB and 
assume  an  accuracy  of  better  than  2  in  the 
measurement for the unreacted species. A Multi-component Detonation Reaction Zone Model for Blast Explosives 
Blaine Asay John Bdzil Joseph Foster Alberto Hernndez  David Lambert and D. Scott Stewart  
University of Illinois Urbana Illinois 61802 USA 
 Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos New Mexico 87545 USA  
Air Force Research Laboratory Armament Directorate Eglin Air Force Base Florida 32542 USA 
Abstract. Aluminum Al is added to explosive formulations based on TNT RDX and 
HMX in an attempt to increase the blast energy and tailor the explosives blast-pressure 
pulse. The detonation pressure of these materials is lower than might be expected even 
though  while  the  subsequent  reactions  that  generate  aluminum  oxide  Al2O3  are  very 
exothermic  sub-oxides  AlO  Al2O  and  condensed-phase  products  that  form  are 
endothermic and reduce the detonation pressure. Because the initial reactions involving 
HMX are both energetic and fast and because the reactions involving the aluminum can 
be both net endothermic due to a decrease in the gas volume and also slow a model for 
weak  detonation  is  required  to  describe  these  explosives.  We  present  an  engineering 
analysis of a typical explosive in this class and demonstrate by means of  accompanying 
numerical  simulations  that  a  three  component  reactive  flow  model  that  has  a  fast 
exothermic step to intermediates followed by a slower endothermic step to final products 
produces weak detonation. 
Aluminum Al is added to explosive formulations 
based  on  TNT  RDX  and  HMX  in  an  attempt  to 
increase the blast energy and tailor the explosives 
formulations  have  been  used  in  both  underwater 
and  enhanced  blast  applications  for  many  years.  
However studies performed as early as the 1950s 
demonstrated that even though the explosives with 
Al had the benefit of higher initial density which 
typically  leads  to  higher  pressures  and  velocities 
their  detonation  performance  suffered.      It  was 
materials was lower than an equivalent mixture of 
explosive  and  inert  diluents  such  as  sand  see 
Cook  et.  al1.    This  occurs  because  the  reactions 
with  oxygen  O2  which 
the  detonation  pressure  of 
suboxides  AlO  Al2O  etc.  are  endothermic  while 
the  subsequent  reactions  that  generate  aluminum 
oxide Al2O3 although very exothermic produce a 
condensed-phase  product  which  serves  to  reduce 
the  detonation  pressure  as  well.  The  particle  size 
of Al that has been used historically is on the order 
of  10-100  microns  or  larger  and  has  been  either 
flake  or  spherical.    Because  of  their  low  surface 
area  using  these  particles  has  the  advantage  of 
producing a mixture that is easy to formulate but 
because  of  their  relatively  large  mass  they  are 
difficult  to  ignite.    Thus  most  of  the  reaction  of 
the aluminum occurs long after the RDX or HMX 
detonation  reaction  zone  passes  and  the  energy 
release from the aluminum does not contribute to 
the  progression  of  the  shock  but  produces  only 
late-time effects.   
Because the initial reactions involving HMX 
etc.  are  both  energetic  and  fast  and  because  the 
reactions involving the aluminum can be both net 
endothermic due to a decrease in the gas volume 
and  also  slow  Anderson  et  al.2  proposed  that  a 
model  for  weak  detonation  is  needed  to  describe 
the  operation  of  blast  explosives  at  least  before 
the time that the products of detonation mix with 
air. For our work we construct a model for an ncomponent  material  later  demonstrated  for  3components described with separate equations of 
fully-unreacted  explosive  various 
partially reacted explosive states and fully-reacted 
explosive and n-1 reaction-rate laws to transition 
the  burning  explosives  among  its  various  ncomponent  states.  Figure  1  shows  an  illustrative 
sketch  of  the  P-v  Hugoniot  diagram  for  a  3component  model  where  the  reaction  of  the 
aluminum produces a net endothermic effect. The 
three  Hugoniots  to  describe  the  typical  blast 
the  reactants  Hugoniot 
unreacted  b  the  Hugoniot  with  no  aluminum 
reacted which leads to a higher detonation speed 
at  the  sonic  point  CJ  point  and  c  the  complete 
Figure 1. Schematic of Pv-Hugoniot curves for a 
blast-type  explosive  with  a  exothermic  reaction 
followed by a endothermic reaction. A ZND - type 
detonation  structure  exists  on  the  Rayliegh  line 
that  connects  point  S  to  the  sonic  state  and  is 
controlled  by  the  first  faster  reaction.  This  is  
followed by the approach to the weak state on the 
complete reaction Hugoniot. This is controlled by 
a second slower reaction.  
reaction  Hugoniot  that  lies  below  the  partially 
reacted  Hugoniot.  One  needs  at  least  two  2 
reactions for a 3 component material model. When 
the first reaction is fast while the second is slow 
the model will generate a weak detonation.  Such a 
model is necessary because models like Ignition  
Growth3 and Crest4 simply interpolate between the 
unreacted  and  fully  reacted  states  to  define  the 
state space of the equation of state. The existing 2component models can only add energy to the flow 
in  a  monotonic  fashion  as  unreacted  explosive 
to  fully-reacted  explosive.  In  our 
model energy can be added to the flow removed 
and then added back as the various reactions move 
the material between the various mixtures of its ncomponents.  
implementation  we  use 
different  JWL  EOSs  one  for  each  of  the  ncomponents.  The 
equilibrium  with  one  another.  This  is  tantamount 
to assuming that the particles of Al and explosive 
are  small  compared  to  the  explosives  detonation 
reaction-zone length. That equilibrium is enforced 
component  materials 
temperature  is  assumed.  Then  the  total  specific 
by  first  inverting  the  JWL  functions cid1842cid3036cid1874cid3036cid1846  to 
get  cid1874cid3036cid1842cid1846  where  a  single  pressure  and 
cid1842cid1846  and 
internal  energy  is cid1857 cid2019cid3036cid1857cid3036cid1842cid1874cid3036
is  cid1874 cid2019cid3036cid1874cid3036
cid2871cid3036cid2880cid2869
where cid2019cid3036 
cid2871cid3036cid2880cid2869
cid1857  and cid1874  described  above  are  set  equal  to  the 
component. Since we assume that there is a single 
particle  velocity  shared  by  each  component 
collocated at a particular spatial location then the 
the  mass  fraction  for 
total  specific  volume 
internal  energy  and  mixture  volume 
solved for in the Euler equations. Our method for 
nonlinear equations of state expressions is simple 
As an example of our method we calibrated a 
3-component  version  of  our  model 
predictions  made  by  CHEETAH-6.05  for  the 
explosive PBXN-113. We calibrated JWLs to the 
1 fully-unreacted phase referred to as material 1 
consisting of unreacted high explosive binder and 
aluminum 2 partially-reacted phase referred to as 
material-2  consisting  of  reacted  high  explosive 
and binder and unreacted aluminum and 3 fullyreacted phase referred to as material-3 where the 
the  reaction-rate  laws cid1830cid2019cid2869 cid1830cid1872 cid1874cid1863cid2869cid2019cid2869  and 
cid1830cid2019cid2871 cid1830cid1872 cid1874cid1863cid28711cid2019cid2869cid2019cid2871.  
aluminum  has  also  undergone  reaction.  We  used 
  We  used  our  newly  developed  MPI  parallel 
three-dimensional Euler solver code AH-AXS3D 
developed  at  Illinois  UIUC  to  solve  a number 
of problems. We find for this 3-component model 
the  structure  of  the  detonation  reaction  zone 
depends  on  the  reaction  rates.  This  is  a  result  of 
our 3-component EOS model allowing for a nonmonotonic  EOS  response  since  energy  can  be 
both  added  exothermic  energy  and  removed 
endothermic  energy  from  the  flow.  Thus  if  the 
exothermic  reaction  step 
endothermic reaction step the energy can have a 
local  maximum  interior  to  the  reaction  zone 
before the effects of the endothermic reaction step 
kick  in.  We  illustrate  this  model  with  a  very 
simple  kinetics  scheme  by  means  of  example 
calculations. We show how solutions to the model 
evolve  to  a  steady-state  weak  detonaton  in  a 
dynamic numerical simulation. Before we explain 
and demonstrate the model in more detail we give 
a  brief  discussion  of  our  evidence  for  weak 
detonation in aluminized blast explosives. 
Here  we  discuss  evidence  for  weak  detonation 
behavior in a generic class of aluminized non-ideal 
explosives. The evidence comes from some sparse 
reasonably  clear  experimental  evidence 
combined  with  some  estimates  from  explosive 
interesting  example  in  this  class  because  it  has  a 
relatively  large  amount  of  an  ideal  explosive 
HMX  combined  with  a  significant  fraction  of 
alumimum with the remainder being a rubberized 
binder  in  a  453520    by  weight  ratio  of 
HMXAlBinder  with  a 
theoretical  maximum 
density of 1.695gcc6. McGregor and Clark found 
that  PBXN-113  made  with  reclaimed  HMX  has 
the  same  performance  as  that  made  from  virgin 
HMX. They also reported a steady axial detonation 
velocity of 6.98 mmsec in 2 inch diameter 12.5 
inch long bare charges.  
Figure 2 shows the result of an experiment by 
Lemar7  for  a  cylinder  test  that  used  PBXIH-135 
which is very similar to PBXN-113 that recorded 
in  Aluminized  Non-ideal 
calculations.  PBXN-113 
a steady detonation velocity of D  7.4 mmsec. 
The  corresponding  Rayleigh  line  is  marked  and 
Lemars JWL parameters were derived from a 
inch  diameter  cylinder  expansion 
PBXIH-135  not  listed  here  and  from  those 
parameters  we  plotted  the  estimated  complete 
reaction  products  Hugoniot 
specific  volume  Pv-plane.  This  Hugoniot  is 
marked  and  displayed  in  red  in  Fig.  2.    The 
Rayleigh  line  tangent  to  the  estimated  JWL 
complete  reaction  products  Hugoniot  is  marked 
and displayed in green and corresponds to an axial 
speed  of  D    5.1  mmsec.  The  estimated  CJ 
pressure  is  approximately  11.2  GPa  whereas  the 
pressure at the complete reaction weak detonation 
point is 5.5 GPa. Lemars Rayleigh line plotted in 
the  Pv  -plane  is  experimentally  unambiguous  in 
that all that is required is the initial density 0 of 
the  unreacted  explosive  and  the  measured  axial 
detonation  velocity  both  of  which  are  simple 
measurements with high certainty. One can safely 
assume  that  the  Rayleigh  line  is  a  locus  of  states 
for a measured quasi-steady detonation.  
Figure  2.  Experimental  Rayleigh 
Hugoniot curve for PBXIH-135 PBXN-113. The 
experimental Rayleigh line corresponds to D  7.4 
mmsec  whereas  the  estimate  of  the  complete 
reaction CJ detonation velocity corresponds to D  
This  very  simple  estimate  based  admittedly 
on sparse experimental data suggests that classical 
detonation  theory  does  not  hold.  The  observation 
is  that  estimated  products  Hugoniot  assumed  to 
coincide with complete reaction of the products is 
the  experimentally  observed 
Rayleigh line and the complete reaction Hugoniot 
seems  to  intersect  the  Rayleigh  line  at  a  classic 
weak detonation state. The experimental Rayleigh 
line seems to propagate at a higher speed D  7.4 
the  appearance  of  being 
overdriven  relative  to  the  speed  that  would  be 
obtained at the presumed CJ point at speed D  5.1 
Further Evidence that WEAK Detonation 
Phenomena are Likely Generic to Aluminized 
The  LLNL  chemical  equilibrium  code 
CHEETAH-6.05  was  used  to  help  estimate  JWL 
product  curves  for  a  generic  formulation  of 
PBXN-113.  The  default  parameterization  of 
CHEETAH-6.0  was  used  and  we  considered  two 
different scenarios 
1 All reactions in the detonation reaction 
zone including the aluminum go to 
2 Incomplete reaction in the detonation 
reaction zone. The aluminum does NOT burn 
in the detonation reaction zone because of the 
slow kinetics of the Al2O3 reaction. 
The  Pv-Hugoniot  curves  and  Rayleigh  line 
the  CHEETAH-6.0  estimates  are 
displayed  in  Figure  3.  CHEETAH-6.0  assumes 
TP-equilibrium  and  ideal  mixing  between  the 
various components of the unreacted explosive for  
a  composition  of  HMX  45  aluminum  35  unplasticized  HTPB-navy 
polybutadiene 20 . Case 1 corresponds to fully 
reacted  PBXN-113  ALL  the  Al  reacts.  One 
expects  that  the  detonation  speed  is  the  higher 
speed  for  Case  2  NO-AL  where  the  aluminum 
does not react than for Case 1  ALL-Al where 
is  reacted.  The  reactions 
producing  Al2O3  will  occur  in  the  region  behind 
the  sonic  plane  where  oxygen  O2  is  robbed 
from  the  carbon  containing  components.    This 
scenario  is  likely  typical  of  most  blast  explosive 
being  considered  i.e.  it  is  generic.  As  the  Al 
reacts the products Hugoniots pull back to the left 
in the Pv-space as the net endothermic effect due 
primarily  to  loss  of  moles  of  gas  controls 
detonation. This correspond to that expected for a 
classical weak detonation as  
Figure  3.  The  Hugoniot  curve  for  completely 
CHEETAH-6.0  labeled  Cheetah  unreacted  and 
shown  in  black.    Hugoniot  and  sonic  Rayleigh 
lines for no aluminum reaction labeled Cheetah 
CJ  NO-Al  and  shown  in  black  and  for  all 
aluminum reacts labeled Cheetah CJ ALL-Al 
in  green  are  displayed.  The 
experimental Rayleigh line labeled and shown in 
blue  and  the  estimated  Hugoniot  labeled  and 
shown in red are displayed. 
Detonation8.  Hence  our  example  shown  for 
PBXN-113 is completely analogous to the case in 
Fickett    Davis  that  corresponds  to  a  reaction 
scheme  that  has  both  an  exothermic  reaction  and 
an  endothermic  reaction  where  the  thermicity 
includes  both  the  heating  effect  and  the  mole 
Once the detonation products expand into the 
O2  containing  atmosphere  the  high  temperatures 
and  the  abundance  of  carbon-rich  components  in 
the  detonation  products  can  be  expected 
undergo  significant  reaction  and  burning  of  these 
carbon-rich  components  in  the  post  detonative 
  Fickett    Davis  classic 
region behind the sonic plane of the self-sustaining 
Note  that  the  unreacted  Hugoniot  shown  in 
Figure  3  computed  from  CHEETAH-6.0  maybe 
too soft and we carried out an exercise to generate 
a more accurate prediction of the Hugoniot EOS of 
inert  material  mixtures  using  a  mixture  closure 
model  developed  by  Saurel  et  al9  not  shown  in 
Fig. 3. The Saurel closure uses a basic modeling 
assumption  that  each  material  follows  along  its 
own  single  material  Hugoniot.  By  directly 
comparing predictions with the Saurel closure for 
calculating the mixture Hugoniot with experiment 
we  have  verified  its  ability  to  make  accurate 
predictions  for  a  mixture  of  MgO  and  paraffin  a 
mixture with similar mechanical properties to our 
unreacted  PBXN-113.  This  improvement  can  be 
used to replace the CHEETAH 6.0 estimate of the 
unreacted Hugoniot but it does not alter the basic 
conclusions discussed in the previous paragraph. 
A version of this model was first implemented 
in  ALE3D using  the  CHEETAH-6.0  EOS  model 
chemicalequilibrium  EOS  is  called  by  ALE3D  for  its 
equation of state information. The CHEETAH-6.0 
chemical-equilibrium  EOS  evaluations  are  very 
time consuming when many independent chemical 
components are included in the calculation as we 
We  included  18  chemical  components  in  our 
calculations.  A  3-step  reaction  scheme  was 
assumed  to  model  the  decomposition  of  the 
explosive with these steps  
of  Weak  Detonation  with 
the decomposition of HMX-solid  
HMX  4CO  4H2  4N2  2O2 
2    the  decomposition  of  HTPB-navy-solid  
HTPB    0.083CO    7.247graphite-solid   
3    the  reaction  of  solid  aluminum    Al   
0.75O2  0.5Al2O3-solid. 
The  reaction  rates  were  taken  to  be  pressure 
dependent  with  the  reaction  rate  constants  being 
progressively smaller in going from reaction 1 to 
reaction  3.  For  our  reaction  scheme  the  amount 
of  HMX-solid  HTPB-binder  and  aluminum-solid 
were controlled by the above 3 reactions while the 
concentrations  of  all  other  chemical  components 
were  controlled  by 
the  CHEETAH-6.0  TPequilibration subroutine. The 1D results shown in 
Fig. 4 verified that the basic model scenario of a 
weak detonation could be observedcomputed in a 
dynamic  reactive  flow  calculation.  Importantly 
the reaction products contain a significant amount 
of  very  hot  in  excess  of  4000  K  carbon-liquid 
aluminum  nitride  and  Al2O3-liquid  not  shown 
generated  as  reaction  products.  The  mean  1D 
detonation  speed  was  D    6.7  mmsec.  The 
length measured from the shock to the sonic point 
in the reaction zone was approximately 1 cm. The 
length  of  the  region  from  the  sonic  point  to 
completion of reaction to equilibrium products was 
approximately  10  cm.  A  Cylinder  test  simulation 
resulted in a reduced speed as expected. 
Figure  4.  A  1D  simulation  of  weak  detonation 
structure displayed at t  60 cid31s as computed with 
ALE3D  using  the  options  that  invoke  inline 
CHEETAH-6.0  for  the  EOS.  A  weak  detonation 
structure  is  observed  and  there  is  reaction behind 
simulations return a qualitatively reasonable result 
and some information on the possible form of the 
detonation  products  for  PBXN-113  detonation. 
However  CHEETAH-6.0  is  notorious  for  giving 
poor  estimates  for  the  simple  CJ  state  and 
detonation velocity in carbon-rich explosives such 
as  the  PBXN-113  explosive  we  are  studying.  In 
addition the computations take an extraordinarily 
long time to run. In the next section we describe a 
3-component 2-reaction model for PBXN-113 that 
can be calibrated to experimental data on PBXN113. That model uses the common JWL EOS form 
with a different EOS for each component and a 
simple 2-step reaction scheme. The model can be 
calibrated  to  give  the  measured  detonation  speed 
and  an  appropriate  EOS  for 
A  Robust  3-Component  Reactive-Flow  Model 
using JWL Equations of State 
Here  we  describe  a  3-component  reactive-flow 
model  that  can  be  used  to  model  detonation  in 
blast  explosives.  We  assume  that  the  explosive 
  Three components reactant intermediate and 
  Three  EOSs  one  for  each  component  based 
on the P-V-T form of the JWL EOS 
  Two reaction rates.  
The  3  components  consist  of  1  a  fullyunreacted  phase  referred  to  as  component-1 
consisting of unreacted high explosive binder and 
aluminum 2 a partially-reacted phase referred to 
as  component-2  consisting  of 
explosive and binder and unreacted aluminum and 
3 a fully-reacted phase referred to as component3  where 
the  aluminum  has  also  undergone 
reaction. A standard continuum mixture hypothesis 
assumes that the 3-components phases are phase 
separated  no  interaction  energy  between  the 
phases  and  that  the  geometric  dimensions  of  the 
unreacted HMX aluminum etc. particles are very 
small such that each material can be considered as 
well-mixed  with  the  other  materials.  In  keeping 
with  our  assumption  of  well-mixed  components 
we  take  the  3-components  to  be  in  pressure 
temperature  equilibrium  with  one  another  and 
make  the  assumption  of  mechanical  equilibrium 
the 3-components move together having the same 
particle velocity.  
The  governing  equations  consists  of 
conservation  laws  for  the  mixture  mass  mixture 
momentum  mixture energy and two reaction-rate 
laws for chemical components  
mixture momentum    
cid3005cid3096cid3005cid3047cid2025cid4652cid4652cid1318cid1873cid4652cid13180 
cid2025cid3005cid3048cid4652cid4652cid1318cid3005cid3047cid4652cid4652cid1318cid1842 
cid2025cid3005cid3032cid3005cid3047cid1842cid4652cid4652cid1318cid1873cid4652cid13180 
cid2025cid3005cid3090cid3117cid3005cid3047cid2033cid2869 
cid2025cid3005cid3090cid3119cid3005cid3047cid2033cid2871 
where cid1872 is time cid4652cid4652cid1318 is the divergence operator cid1873cid4652cid1318 is 
the  particle  velocity  vector cid1842  is  pressure cid1846  is 
temperature cid2019cid3036  is  the  mass  fraction  of  the  ithcomponent  cid3005cid3005cid3047 cid3105cid3105cid3047cid1873cid4652cid1318cid4652cid4652cid1318  is  the  material  time 
derivative  Lagrangian  time  derivative cid2025  is  the 
mixture  density  with  cid2869cid3096cid1874 cid2019cid3036
cid1874cid3036  and 
cid2871cid3036cid2880cid2869
cid1874cid3036cid1842cid1846 
thermal EOS cid1857 is the mixture internal energy with 
cid1857 cid2019cid3036
cid1857cid3036 and cid1857cid3036cid1842cid1874cid3036 is the specific internal 
cid2871cid3036cid2880cid2869
ith-components mechanical EOS cid2033cid3036cid1842cid1846cid2019cid2869..cid2019cid2871 
and with  cid2019cid3036
cid2871cid3036cid2880cid2869 1 mass conservation. In this 
ithcomponent which we get from the ith-components 
is the rate of mass production of the ith-component 
energy of the ith-component which we get from the 
the  specific  volume  of 
The JWL EOS forms is used to represent each 
model we have only a single pressure and a single 
temperature  based  on  our  assumption  of  pressure 
and temperature equilibrium.  
cid1842cid1827cid3036cid1857cid1876cid1868cid2879cid3019cid2869cid3284cid3023cid3284cid1828cid3036cid1857cid1876cid1868cid2879cid3019cid2870cid3284cid3023cid3284cid3104cid3284cid3004cid3297cid3284cid3021cid3023cid3284
cid1831cid3036cid1857cid3036cid1874cid2868cid1842cid1848cid3036cid2033cid3036cid1827cid3036cid34361cid18441cid3036cid1848cid3036cid2033cid3036cid3440cid1857cid1876cid1868cid2879cid3019cid2869cid3284cid3023cid3284 
         cid1828cid3036cid4672cid2869cid3019cid2870cid3284cid3023cid3284cid3104cid3284cid4673cid1857cid1876cid1868cid2879cid3019cid2870cid3284cid3023cid3284cid3032cid3116cid3284cid3049cid3116   
JWL mechanical EOS  
of  the  original  un-shocked  mixture.  The  internal 
LLNL  in  the  definition  of  the  JWL  mechanical 
where cid1827cid3036 cid1828cid3036 cid18441cid3036 cid18442cid3036 cid2033cid3036  and cid1829cid3049cid3036  are  the 
individual  phase  EOS  constants  cid1857cid2868cid3036 
reference energy with cid1831cid2868cid3036cid3032cid3116cid3284cid3049cid3116  and cid1848cid3036cid3049cid3284cid3049cid3116 for the 
ith-component while cid1874cid2868 cid2869cid3096cid3116 is the specific volume 
energy expression cid1831cid3036 is the scaled energy used by 
For specified values of cid2019cid2869..cid2019cid2871 the EOSs must 
be used to specify an expression for cid1842cid1857cid2025 where 
cid1857  and cid2025  are  the  mixture  internal  energy  and 
mixture density respectively. That is for cid1857 cid2025cid2869cid3049 
and cid2019cid2869..cid2019cid2871  specified  we  solve  the  two  equations 
given below for cid1842 and cid1846.  
cid1874 cid2019cid3036
cid1874cid3036cid1842cid1846  
cid2871cid3036cid2880cid2869
cid1857 cid2019cid3036
cid1857cid3036cid1842cid1848cid3036  
cid2871cid3036cid2880cid2869
In most cases the JWL thermal EOS has cid1848cid3036cid1842cid1846 
The resulting function cid1848cid3036cid1842cid1846 is then substituted 
solved  for cid1842  and cid1846  using  a  second  NewtonRaphson  solver.  For  regions  where cid1842  and cid1846  are 
low  and cid1827cid30360  and cid1828cid30360 cid1848cid3036cid1842cid1846  may  not  be 
into  both  the  mixture  mass  and  mixture  energy 
equations  and  those  two  equations  are  in  turn 
being  a  monotone  function  that  can  be  inverted 
using  a  simple  and  fast  Newton-Raphson  solver. 
monotone.  In  that  circumstance  we  use  a  hybrid 
solver to invert the JWL thermal EOS that uses a 
combination  of  bisection  and  a  Newton-Raphson 
solver  a  Brents  Method-like  solver.  Although 
not  as  efficient  as  the  simple  Newton-Raphson 
solver  this  hybrid  solver  is  both  robust  and 
For  purposes  of  this  demonstration  the  3component  JWL  EOS  model  was  calibrated  to 
reproduce the three EOSs that were obtained using 
CHEETAH-6.0  and  identified  in  Fig.  3.  The  3components are  
component-1 fully unreacted explosive HMX 
45 aluminum 35 un-plasticized HTPB-navy 
hydroxy-terminated polybutadiene 20  
component-2 reacted HMX 45 unreacted 
aluminum 35 reacted un-plasticized HTPBnavy hydroxy-terminated polybutadiene 20  
component-3 fully reacted explosive.  
The JWL parameters for the 3-component model 
are shown in Table 1.  
Table 1 The JWL parameters used for the 3component model 
Common initial parameters 
In our demonstration calculations we used the 
simple state-independent reaction-rate model 
cid2033cid2869cid1863cid2869cid2019cid2869  
cid2033cid2870cid1863cid2869cid2019cid2869cid1863cid2871cid2019cid2870  
cid2033cid2871cid1863cid2871cid2019cid2870  
where cid1863cid2869..cid1863cid2871 are reaction rate constants and where 
cid2033cid2869cid2033cid2870cid2033cid28710 and cid2019cid2869cid2019cid2870cid2019cid28711.  
Implementation and Testing of our 3Component JWL EOS Reactive-Flow Model. 
Since  hydrocodes  such  as  ALE3D  and  CTH  do 
to  model  3-component 
detonation  models  we  used  our  own  UIUC 
1D3D Euler solver AH-AXS1D3D to solve the 
above described partial-differential equations. Our 
solver  uses  a  uniform  structured  grid  and  the 
method  of  lines  with  a  3rd-order  accurate  TVD 
Runge-Kutta  scheme  for  time  advancement.  The 
spatial  solver  uses  WENO5-LLF  which  uses  a 
component  wise  Local  Lax-Friedrich  LLF  flux 
splitting  scheme  with  5th-order  accurate  WENO 
interpolation.  AH-AXS1D3D  was  verified  for 
convergence  and  accuracy  by  running  fourteen 
relevant 1D2D3D test cases using the Ideal EOS 
and our 3-component JWL EOS form. The results 
of  the  resolution-study  were  in  agreement  with 
results  found  in  published  papers  and  showed 
accurate  and  stable  performance  metrics.  We 
tested  the  implementation  of  our  3-component 
JWL  reactive  flow  model  in  AH-AXS1D3D  by 
comparing  the  steady  traveling  wave  detonation 
solution  to  our  model  with  the  AH-AXS1D3D 
solution. Some properties of the solutions to our 3component 
described in the following section. 
Properties of the Solutions to the 3-Component 
JWL EOS Reactive-Flow Model  
For  our  3-component  model  energy  can  be 
both  added  exothermic  energy  and  removed 
endothermic energy from the detonation reaction 
zone. If the exothermic reaction step is faster than 
the  endothermic  reaction  step  the  energy  can 
have  a  local  maximum  interior  to  the  reaction 
reaction  step  kick  in.  We  examined  how  the 
relative values of the rate constants cid1863cid2869 and cid1863cid2871 for 
reaction-rate  model 
influence the steady-state detonation reaction-zone 
structure.  The  data  in  Table  1  provided  the 
equation of state input.  
  We ran a series of reverse impact simulations 
that assumed the unreacted explosive had an initial 
and  uniform  negative  particle  velocity  and 
suddenly  encountered  a  hard  wall  a  reflective 
boundary  condition  at  x0  .The  right  boundary 
condition  was  set  as  an  outflow  boundary.    A 
shock  is  formed  when  the  unreacted  explosive 
collides with the wall left boundary and initiates 
reaction.  Eventually  an  unsupported  detonation 
emerges  and  travels  to  the  right.  One  must  use  a 
sufficiently  large  domain  to  ensure  that  one 
observes a steady state after the initiation transient.   
  We  present  the  results  from  4  simulations 
made using the AH-AXS1D3D  code that took the 
initial conditions in the unreacted explosive to be 
0    1.695    gmcm3  u0        -0.5  cmsec  p0   
0.0001 GPa with  1   1 2  3  0. Holding the 
value of cid1863cid2871 fixed at cid1863cid28711.35 cid3034cid3040cid3030cid3030cid3091cid3046 we change the 
value of cid1863cid2869 from cid1863cid28694.5 cid3034cid3040cid3030cid3030cid3091cid3046 to cid1863cid28690.09 cid3034cid3040cid3030cid3030cid3091cid3046. 
Problem 1   k1   0.9 k3    1.35 gmcm3sec 
Problem 2   k1  0.09 k3  1.35 gmcm3sec 
Problem 3   k1  1.8 k3  1.35 gmcm3sec 
Problem 4   k1  4.5 k3  1.35 gmcm3sec 
the  computed  pressure 
profiles.  It  was  not  possible  to  plot  the  results  at 
exactly  the  same  times.    However  the  times  are 
very  close  as  shown  in  the  figure  captions.    The 
cases  with  k1  4.5  1.8  and  0.9  all  reached  a 
steady state by approximately 205 sec.  However 
the case with k1 0.09 did not reach a steady state 
until much later.  The trend in the results is what 
would  be  expected  as  the  value  of  k1  decreases 
the steady-state detonation velocity decreases. The 
proportion to the decrease of the reaction constant 
Figure 5.  The pressure profiles are displayed as a 
function  of  position  for  the  four  problems  that 
were run.  The profiles are displayed at 204.2 cid2020cid1871 
205.4 cid2020cid1871 208.1 cid2020cid1871 and 205.4 cid2020cid1871 for problems 1 
through 4 respectively. An increasing value of cid1863cid2869 
Figures  6-9  show  profiles  for  1  and cid2019cid2870  that 
brings with it an increasing detonation velocity.  
illustrate how the sonic point moves relative to the 
shock  as  k1  is  varied  relative  to  k3.    The  sonic 
points are interior to the reaction zone and the flow 
at the end of the reaction zone is supersonic. As a 
consequence  the  flow  following  the  reaction  is 
also  supersonic  which  causes 
plateau  regions  to  form  behind  the  end  of  the 
reaction zone. Reaction zones with such a structure 
are referred to as weak detonation reaction zones. 
The location of the sonic point was identified 
for each of the first three cases by finding the axial 
location  where cid1873cid1855cid1830.  The  steady  speed cid1830 
was  measured  determined  by  tracking  the  shock 
front  after  a  steady-state  flow  is  established  and 
corresponds  to  Fig.  10.    The  sonic  point  moves 
away  from  the  lead  shock  as  the  value  of  k1  is 
Figure  6    Comparison  of  1  and  2  for  case  with 
k4.5.  The  sonic  point  is  located  interior  to  the 
Figure 7.  Comparison of 1 and 2 for k1.8 case. 
The  sonic  point  is  located  interior  to  the reaction 
Figure 8.  Comparison of 1 and 2 for k1 0.9. The 
sonic point is located interior to the reaction zone 
Figure 9.    Comparison of  1  and 2 for k1  0.09. 
The reaction zone is very long for this case and the 
flow  has  not  yet  become  steady  in  the  shockattached reference frame. However it is clear that 
for  this  case  a  weak  detonation  is  not  found  and 
the reaction zone is not followed by a supersonic 
horizontal plateau as seen in Figures 6-8.  
Figure  10.  Constant  detonation  speed  trajectories 
measured for 3 cases. k1 0.09. k1  1.8 and k1  
for the first reaction cid1863cid2869 is increased. So unlike the 
detonation velocity increases as the rate constant 
We find that the one-dimensional steady state 
case for the standard detonation reaction zone 
models Ignition  Growth HVRB etc. with only 
one reaction progress variable the onedimensional detonation velocity DOES depend on 
the reaction rate constants the relative ratio of the 
reaction rate constants. In Fig. 11 we show our 
determination of how the weak detonation speed 
D varies as a function of the ratio of the reaction 
rate constants cid1863cid2871cid1863cid2869for this realization of the 
state for the components. In the limit as cid1863cid2871cid1863cid2869  
model that uses the calibrated JWL equations of 
goes to zero the speed D approaches 6.8 mms 
and agrees with our one-dimensional 1D ALE3D 
simulation as it should. Generally it will be the 
case that the equilibrium 1D detonation speed will 
be a function of the reaction rate parameters.  
Summary and Conclusions  
There  is  strong  evidence  that  indicates  that 
highly  aluminized  explosives  that  do  not  release 
all  their  reaction  energy  promptly  and  have  an 
initial  exothermic 
endothermic  completion  of  reaction  admit  weak 
detonation.  Our  initial  estimates  of  the  pressure 
specific volume Hugoniots made with CHEETAH 
6.0 confirms a scenario that suggests that a weak 
detonation  will  occur  if  all  of  the  fast  reactants 
HMX release their energy first followed by a  
cid1863cid2871cid1863cid2869  for  the  3-component  model  employs  the 
Figure  11.  The  dependence  of  weak  detonation 
speed D on the ratio of the reaction rate constants 
calibrated  JWL  equations  of  state  and  the  simple 
kinetic scheme of this section. 
slower  release  of  energy  to  product  completion. 
This  scenario  is  found  to  be  consistent  with  the 
very sparse experimental data for PBXN-113. 
  We  confirmed  these  conclusions  in  another 
way by developing a model that can use standard 
EOS  fits  afforded  by  the  JWL  EOS  for  each 
component.  We  chose  the  values  of  the  JWL 
constants  for  the  EOS  for  the  components  to 
approximately  correspond  to  PBXN-113  values 
although  we  do  not  claim  that  these  values 
reported  here  can  be  used  for  predictive  models. 
We implemented a very simple but sensible first 
order depletion reaction scheme for a progression 
of  reactants  from  component-1  reactants  to 
final  products  With  our  group  solver  developed 
at UIUC AH-AXS1D3D we verified that weak 
detonations  could  be  observed  in  reverse  impact 
numerical simulations after the initiation transients 
decay. Thus we believe that it is now possible to 
use this 3-component model to do more complex 
calibrated  against  a  more  complete  experimental 
Fickett  William  C.  Davis 
Detonation UC Press Berkeley CA 1979.  
9.  Saurel  R.  Le  Metayer  O.  and  Massoni  J. 
Shock jump relations for multiphase mixtures with 
stiff  mechanical  relaxation  Shock  Waves  16 
D.  S.  Stewart  B.  W  Asay  and  J.  B.  Bdzil  have 
been  supported  by  a  grant  from  the  USAF 
Munitions  Directorate  Eglin  AFB  FL  grant 
number  FA8651-10-1-0004.  Additional  support 
for  A.  Hernandez  has  come  from  an  AFOSR 
Physical  Mathematics  grant  FA9550-12-1-0422. 
D. S. Stewarts activities have also been supported 
by  ONR  grant  N000014-12-1-0555 A nonlinear evolution equation for pulsating detonations using Ficketts model with
chain branching kinetics
Andr Bellerive Matei Radulescu
 Mechanical Engineering Department University of Ottawa Ottawa Ontario Canada
Abstract. The detonation wave stability is addressed using Ficketts equation i.e. the
reactive form of Burgers equation. This serves as a simple analogue to the reactive Euler equations permitting one to gain insight into the nonlinear dynamics of detonation
waves. Chemical kinetics were modeled using a two-step reaction with distinct induction
and reaction zones. An evolution equation for the detonation structure was derived using
perturbation theory on the steady wave structure for large activation energy and slow rate
of energy release. While the rst order solution was found unconditionally unstable the
second order evolution equation predicted both stable and unstable solutions. The neutral
stability boundary was found analytically given by   4 where  is the product of activation energy and the ratio of induction to reaction time. This reproduces accurately what
has been previously established for the reactive Euler equations and veried experimentally. The evolution equation undergoes a Hopf bifurcation capturing stable limit cycle
oscillations in the unstable regime and offers unique insight into the instability mechanism. The mechanism amplifying the perturbations lies within the induction zone where
an Arrhenius-type rate equation provides a large change in induction times for small perturbations. The mechanism attenuating the perturbations arises from acoustic effects which
delays the amplication of the shock front. The longer the detonation wave the more time
it takes for the amplication from the reaction zone to reach the shock front creating gradients that counter-act the shock front amplications. The results agree with direct numerical
simulation as well as recovering many similarities with the reactive Euler equation.
Detonations are self-sustained supersonic waves
consisting of a shock front that is driven by a volumetric expansion induced by chemical reactions
of the shocked material. Zeldovich Von Neuman
and Dring discovered the idealized steady structure and is known as the ZND wave. The minimum
sustainable steady detonation speed is known as the
Chapman-Jouguet CJ detonation velocity where
the detonation velocity is simply the speed at which
the equilibrium or fully reacted zone ow is exactly
sonic relative to the lead shock. In practice detonations are rarely stable and have two main instability modes one-dimensional pulsating or multidimensional cellular. The natural tendency of a reactive mixture to detonate has been correlated with
stability characteristics1.
It has also been shown
that unstable detonations have wider limits1 2 than
stable ones. Determining the parameters that con
456
trol detonation stability is of particular interest. The
product of the ratios of induction to reaction time
and the activation energy
has been identied in the stability analyses of selfpropagating detonation waves3 4 5. The physical
mechanism responsible for changes of the shockignition regime when  is varied remain unclear.
There are typically three different approaches for
analyzing stability problems linear stability analysis direct numerical simulation and asymptotic
modeling. There is a wealth of literature for each
approach a recent review by Ng and Zhang offers
the current state of knowledge6. Linear stability
permits one to determine the parameters controlling
stability but lacks in identifying the mechanisms.
Direct numerical simulation can yield accurate simulations for nonlinear systems in 1-D and 2-D but
recovering the explanation why some detonation are
stable and others are not is difcult. Finally asymptotic modeling offers a better understanding of the
mechanisms behind detonation stability but are restricted by their limits of derivation.
Such asymptotic methods have been used on the
Reactive Euler equations to achieve analytical solutions by many researchers. The typical strategy
is formulated using a combination of the following
the limit of large activation energy7 8 the Newtonian limit9 overdriven detonation limit10 andor
the limit of weak heat release11 12 13. Nevertheless such methods become very complex and limit
high order analysis of the reactive Euler equations
due to strong nonlinearities.
Detonation analogues have been introduced by
Fickett14 15 and by Majda and Rosales16 to better understand detonations. They are both a variation of Burgers equation17 with an added energy
release term. The former has two families of waves
forward traveling pressure waves and energy release
along the particle path. The model proved useful
in direct numerical simulation and asymptotic modeling of piston initiated detonations18 and direct
numerical simulation of self-sustained detonations
leading to chaotic oscillation19. The Majda-Rosales
model has forward traveling waves and innitely
fast backward traveling waves i.e. instantaneous.
Direct numerical simulation has also shown chaotic
The present work focuses on asymptotic modeling for pulsating CJ detonations in Ficketts
equation14 15. The simplicity of Ficketts model
can serve to study the stability mechanism without
the complexity of the strong nonlinearities of the
reactive Euler equations while still reproducing the
complex detonation dynamics19.
inductionreaction studied in detail by Short  Sharpe3 Ng
et al.4 and Leung Radulescu  Sharpe5 for the
reactive Euler equations and by Radulescu and
Tang19 18 for the Fickett model. Analytical solutions to the pulsating detonations and stability
boundary are sought using asymptotic expansions
at the limit of high activation energy.
The paper is organized as follows. First the
model is presented and an oscillator equation is derived for the lead shock perturbation speed which
takes the form of a second order nonlinear ODE.
The dynamics predicted by the oscillator are then
discussed. The predicted neutral boundary stability
is obtained in closed form in terms of  and is compared with numerical solutions. The mechanism of
instability is then discussed from the analysis of the
The detonation wave is modeled with Ficketts
equations an analogue to the compressible reactive
Euler equations. The model is of the same form as
the inviscid Burgers equation17 utuux  0 with
an added energy release term in the reaction layer.
The following equations describing the model are
the conservation state and reaction rate
where  is analogous to density p is the pressure
Q is the heat release parameter r the reaction rate
and i and r will denote the induction and reaction
zone progress variables respectively.
A large majority of chemical reactions begin with
chain initiation followed by a sequence of chainbranching chain-recombination and chain termination steps. The modeled detonation structure is assumed to have a two-step reaction chain-initiation
followed by chain-branchingrecombination and
chain termination. The former is assumed to be
thermally neutral i.e. no heat release and the latter to be exothermic and independent of the thermodynamic state i.e. independent of . The chaininitiation dynamics in the induction zone are controlled by a density-sensitive Arrhenius form of the
where cj is the Chapman-Jouguet density Ki is
the constant of reaction and  is the activation energy. Ki controls the induction zone length and 
controls the sensitivity to changes in density. The
progress variable i in Eq. 4 is equal to 1 at the
shock front and 0 at the end of the induction zone
where the heat release is then triggered. The energy
release rate is of the form
where Kr is the reaction constant and  the reaction
order. The reaction order is assumed to be such that
12    1. A reaction order of non-unity is used
to approximate several steps of chain-branching and
chain termination that is typically found. r  1
signals the rear equilibrium or sonic point of the detonation wave.
To obtain the steady structure of the traveling
wave solution the spatial variable is changed to a
shock attached frame with   x  Dt where D is
the steady detonation speed. The conservation 2
state 3 and rate 4 equations in the steady shock
attached frame are then given by
Fig. 1. Steady detonation structure of density in
the shock attached frame of reference traveling at
the Chapman-Jouguet detonation velocity Dcj for
Ki  1 Kr  2 and the heat release parameter
Integrating these equations yields the analytical results for the steady wave structure in the induction
and in the reaction zone cj    ind
with ind the end of the induction zone and cj at
the end of the reaction zone at CJ velocity. The CJ
velocity is found with the same solution as Burgers
where subscript reac is the fully reacted state and
subscript o is the undisturbed material. Illustrated
in Figure 1 is an example steady detonation wave.
Nonlinear Evolution Equation
The evolution equation is derived assuming a
high activation energy by setting   1 with
 cid28 1 a longer reaction to induction time with
KrKi cid28 1 and a slow pulsating evolution time
with   t with t scaled to the induction delay
time. The unsteady shock attached frame of reference spatial variable will be of the form
where h is the position of the perturbed shock relative to the steady CJ detonation.
The variables are scaled to the steady post shock
Chapman-Jouguet detonation values shown in the
previous section. The non-dimensional variables
where an overtilde  denotes non-dimensional
quantities and subscript s denotes values in the immediate post shock steady detonation wave. Accordingly the density is scaled to the induction
zones steady density 9. The length n is scaled
with the induction zones length 11. Time is
scaled so 1 unit of t is the time for a particle to pass
through the induction zone with Ds the ChapmanJouguet velocity 16. Ficketts equation in a shock
traveling frame of reference scaled to immediate
post-shock values in the steady wave may be written
where the overtildes  on non-dimensional variables are removed for simplicity  is the inverse
activation energy subscript  is the slowed time
derivative h is the shock front velocity position
relative to the steady CJ detonation and 14 is the
scaled heat release parameter. Similarly the reaction rate equation 4 is given by
The scaled reaction rates for the induction and reaction zone respectively are
where ri is scaled to the induction time K is the
ratio of induction to reaction time and  is the reaction order   12 for this analysis. The variables
are expanded about the steady solutions 9 and 12
These expansions are substituted into 19 and 20
and integrated across the detonation wave for O1
Chapman-Jouguet detonation wave with a ZND
prole shown in the previous section see Fig. 1.
Next O terms are integrated across the shock
front followed by integrating to the end of the
induction zone. The end location of the induction zone or reaction front is found by integrating 21 with 20 and now denes a new function
Due to the Arrhenius-type reaction rate 21 an
O change in h results in an O1 change in
the length of the induction zone 24. Subsequently
the solution at the end of the induction zone is used
as the boundary at the onset of reaction. The density is then integrated across the reaction zone to
fully reacted material. A singular solution for 1
at r  1 fully reacted is found due to the sonic
value of the fully reacted material in O1. Consequently to achieve equilibrium at the fully reacted
point the following condition is met
the O evolution equation which admits exponential solutions i.e. accelerating or decelerating
detonations waves for positive h 0  0 and
negative h 0  0 initial perturbations respectively. The same result was found in the reactive Euler equations for the same two-step reaction model8
and for a one-step reaction model7.
The dampening effects attenuating or saturating the perturbations are achieved at higher order
O2. By following the same integration for higher
order a similar singular solution occurs for 2.
Combining the remaining terms with 25 leads to
the full nonlinear evolution equation
1h   eh  1  2eh h   3h
where the constants are given by
a Shock front density history.
The evolution equation is autonomous nonlinear
and second order in time in the shock front perturbation velocity h .
Numerical Solutions to the Evolution Equation
The nonlinear evolution equation 26 is solved
numerically. Due to the stiff nature of the nonlinear ODE a backwards derivation formula with
Newton iterations22 is used. To simulate shock perturbations initial conditions are taken as h  0
and h   0.1. The evolution equation 26 predicts both stable and unstable solutions. The former
decays to the steady CJ detonation wave. Due to
nonlinearities the latters amplitude of oscillation
amplies exponentially until reaching a limit-cycles
through a Hopf bifurcation.
The parameters affecting stability were found to
be the ratios of induction to reaction time K the
activation energy  and the reaction order . The
heat release parameter Q in 3 was not found to
affect dynamics of instability. First K and  were
kept constant and  was varied. It was found that
an increase in  promotes instability undergoing a
hopf Bifurcation. For example these solutions are
b Shock front acceleration vs. relative velocity.
Fig. 2. a Stable solution with K  0.1 and   33
and b shock speed relative to steady wave phase
plotted at a constant K  0.1 and   12 with
increasing  in Figs. 2 to 5. Figure 2 shows a stable solution where the perturbations decays to the
steady CJ detonation velocity. Further increasing 
until the solution no longer decays shows a neutral
stability point where the perturbation does not decay nor amplify see Fig. 3. An additional increase
in  gives rises to higher amplitude limit-cycles see
Fig. 4 where the amplitude initially grows exponentially then stabilizes in a periodic limit cycle. Increasing the activation energy even more results in
a higher amplitude and a higher frequency of oscillation see Fig. 5. The evolution equation 26 becomes unsolvable for larger instabilities due to its
a Shock front density history.
a Shock front density history
b Shock front acceleration vs. relative velocity.
b Shock front acceleration vs. relative velocity.
Fig. 3. Neutrally stable solution for K  0.1 and
increasingly stiff behavior.
We then kept  and K constant and found that
decreasing the reaction order  i.e. shortening the
reaction length also results in a Hopf bifurcation
going from stable solutions to limit-cycles. Similarly keeping  and  constant and increasing the
induction to reaction time ratio K will also result
in unstable solutions provided the activation energy
Linearized Oscillator and Neutral Stability
To predict stable and unstable solutions the evolution equation 26 is linearized at the stability
point h  h   0 i.e. the idealized CJ deto
Fig. 4. Unstable solution for K  0.1 and   55.
1h    1  2h   3h  0.
The linearized equation is a damped 1  2 
0 or amplied 1  2  0 harmonic oscillator. Since the initial shock front velocity perturbation is assumed to be small the linearized system accurately predicts the early perturbation decay
or growth in the nonlinear evolution equation 26.
Accordingly the damping terms coefcient in the
linearized equation 12 in 28 directly controls if energy is transfered into the reaction zone
as feedback or out of the reaction zone as attenuation. For stable solutions a positive damping
term 1  2  0 in the linearized evolution equa
461
a Shock front density history
Fig. 6. Stability boundary for a reaction order of
  12 from the evolution equation in blue compared to numerical simulation in red dots23.
the analysis recovers the correct neutral stability
boundary even when the conditions for its derivation K cid28 1 are no longer true as can be seen in
b Shock front acceleration vs. relative velocity.
Fig. 5. a Increasingly unstable solution for K 
0.1 and   63 and b shock speed relative to
steady wave phase portrait.
tion 28 gives rise to the stability criteria
This stability criteria agrees with numerical simulations see Figure 6. At the limit of K cid28 1 the
product of activation energy times the ratio of induction time to reaction time is equal to a constant
the non-dimensional number
In contrast the limit of K cid29 1 shows the stability to be uniquely controlled by the activation energy   4. Somewhat surprisingly we nd that
To identify the underlying mechanisms behind
perturbation growth and decay the damping term
1  2 in 28 is traced back prior to calcula
0
where recalling F   is the induction length 24
and R  F   is the reaction length. The second
term of the left hand side can also be written as
to illustrate the effects of the induction to reaction
The leading order element of 31 originates from
the O evolution equation 25 and is respon
462
sible for perturbation amplication where an increase in shock velocity h  leads to a large decrease in induction length 24. As a result the reaction fronts velocity F  h  eh  begins accelerating forward which increases the amount of
reactants. Consequently the pressure 3 in the reaction zone increases and through the conservation
equation 2 the shock front accelerates forward in
order to achieve equilibrium at the fully rear sonic
point. The feedback results in a runaway acceleration of the shock front at rst order. Mathematically this is expressed as h   h at the equilibrium point which admits exploding solutions. The
activation energy controls how sensitive the induction length is to changes in density through the rate
equation 21. For this reason increasing the activation energy increases instabilities as seen in Figs. 2
The unstable solutions reach periodic limit cycles see Fig. 4 b and 5 b because the ampli
Positive dampeningattenuation only emerges at
higher order namely t terms are no longer zero.
Amplications originating from the rear equilibrium point are now communicated along n and 
coordinates i.e. acoustic waves. The element leading to attenuation is due to h in  1 in the
rst and second term of 31 i.e. shock acceleration. The resulting acoustic waves manifest themselves as gradients in the induction and reaction
zone sloped forwards when compressing the media and sloped backwards when expanding the media. Mathematically it is expressed as h   h
to get equilibrium at the fully reacted point where
by itself admits stable exponential solutions decaying to h   h  0.
The magnitude of the dampening term is a result
of the gradients creating a net difference in density
between the equilibrium point and the shock front
relative to the steady solution. Consequently the
length of both the induction and reaction zone will
determine the net difference in density the rst and
second term of 31. From equation 32 longer reactions i.e. decreasing K leads to stronger attenuation. If the total net difference in density between
the equilibrium point and shock front due to shock
speed perturbation is larger than the amplication
mechanism the third term of 31 then the perturbations will decay and vice versa.
cation mechanism balances out with the attenuation mechanism on those orbits. This balance occurs due to the reaction fronts acceleration going
to zero when the induction length goes to zero as
shock speed increases i.e. tho reaction front cannot surpass the shock front.
The oscillatory mode is from the same origin as
the attenuation term but is instead due to the reaction fronts acceleration coming from the second
term of 31. The reaction fronts acceleration is of
the form F   h   exph  ... and acts as an
equivalent inertial term that is analogous to the mass
in a spring and damper system. Mathematically this
can be expressed as h    h to achieve equilibrium at sonic point. Longer reaction layers i.e.
lowering K leads to a longer time for the perturbations from F  to reach the shock front resulting in
a longer period of oscillation.
A second order autonomous nonlinear evolution
equation is derived for pulsating Chapman-Jouguet
detonation waves. The evolution equation predicts
stable and unstable solutions undergoing a Hopf bifurcation when increasing activation energy andor
the ratio of induction to reaction time. For longer reaction times compared to induction times lowering
the product of activation energy and ratio of induction to reaction time leads to stability. For shorter
reaction times compared to induction times lowering the activation energy alone leads to stability. All
unstable numerical solutions calculated have a periodic limit-cycle. However increasing the activation energy and ratio of induction to reaction time
well beyond the stability boundary leads to a progressively stiff evolution equation which becomes
unsolvable with the current numerics used.
In the induction zone a small perturbation leads
to large change in induction time owing to a high activation energy which in turn increases the amount
of reactants effectively amplifying the shock front
further through the conservation law. The stability
mechanism is second order and originates from both
the reaction and induction zone. A net density difference due to gradients forming because of acoustic effects in the reaction and induction zone controlled by their respective lengths attenuates shock
amplication. If the net decrease in density is larger
than the additional reactants compared to CJ then
the detonation wave is stable and vice versa.
The dynamics observed with the evolution equation agree with numerical simulations as well as detonation dynamics in reactive Euler systems. Although the present analysis was successful in explaining the instability mechanism of detonations
and predicting the neutral stability boundary in
terms of the  parameter it does not predict any
subsequent period doubling bifurcation and chaotic
dynamics previously observed for this system and
the reactive Euler equations4 19 20. This is due to
the fact that the evolution equation is second order
and period doubling bifurcation requires additional
dimensions. Such dimensions could potentially be
found at the third order.An Improved Empirical Fit of the Detonation Product Isentrope Near the CJ Point  
Daniel D. Lanterman 
Systems Engineering Department 
Indian Head MD 20640 
Naval Surface Warfare Center Indian Head Explosive Ordnance Disposal Technology Division 
Abstract. Often one is compelled to utilize explosives whose performance characteristics 
have  been  incompletely  characterized  and  various  approximations  are  required.    Paul 
Cooper has previously published one such approximation a fit of the detonation product 
Hugoniot in pressure-particle velocity P-u space1.  Cooper observed that when pressure 
and particle velocity were non-dimensionalized by their values at the Chapman-Jouguet 
CJ state that P-u data for many different explosives at different densities overlapped.  
He made an empirical fit of the form PPCJ abuuCJ cuuCJ 2 where PCJ and uCJ 
are the CJ pressure and particle velocity respectively.  We improve this fit by making a 
correction to its slope near the CJ point.   
An  equation  of  state  EOS  for  explosive 
products is necessary to perform many calculations 
encountered  in  explosive  system  design  such  as 
the pressures transmitted through various barriers.  
Unfortunately in many engineering situations it is 
necessary to utilize explosives for which the EOS 
has not been measured.  When data is unavailable 
thermodynamic equilibrium codes2 have been very 
successful here although it is helpful to have other 
methods  as  well  for  comparison. 
especially  true  when  comparing  predictions  from 
computer codes to simple experiments.    
to  be  approximated. 
One  of  the  simplest  analytic  approximations 
that is frequently made is the use of the acoustic 
approximation3  which  approximates  the  product 
expansion  isentrope  or  Hugoniot  in  cases  of 
through  the  CJ  point  in  pressure-particle  velocity 
P-u  space.    This  approximation  follows  directly 
from  the  fact  that  the  Rayleigh  line  is  tangent  to 
the  reflected  Rayleigh 
the  detonation  product  isentrope  at  the  CJ  point 
and  is  illustrated  in  Figure  1.    That  these  two 
curves are equal and tangent at this point follows 
logically  from  well-known  conservation  laws  and 
stability  arguments4.    The  detonation  product 
isentrope  and  Hugoniot  are  the  same  to  second 
order5  near  the  CJ  point  as  well  and  for  many 
practical calculations the two curves can be treated 
as interchangeable near the CJ point. 
Fig.  1.  The  Rayleigh  line  and  detonation  product 
Hugoniot plotted in P-u space.  The two curves are 
equal and tangent at the CJ point. 
This  technique  is  frequently  used  to  estimate 
the  CJ  point  of  new  explosives.    Typically  such 
experiments will measure the free surface velocity 
of metal plate push test3 motion of the interface 
between  an  optical  window  and  the  explosive 
products  or  shock  velocity  through  an  inert 
material  in  contact  with  the  explosive  aquarium 
test6.    These  tests  have  seen  increased  use  as 
laser-interferometer-based  velocimeters7-8  have 
become  commonplace  at  a  greater  number  of 
laboratories thus enabling more facile and precise 
measurements.  This is especially true for low cost 
tests  that  are  intended  to  screen  new  explosive 
molecules  and  formulations  in  the  early  phase  of 
insufficient  amounts  of 
material may be available for cylinder tests.   
to  systematically  over-predict 
Since  realistic  isentropeshugoniots  have  a 
concave  upward  shape  this  assumption  can  be 
pressure.    This  occurs  both  in  the  case  when  the 
window  material  has  a  lower  shock  impedance 
than the detonation products and in the case where 
it  has  a higher  shock  impedance.   Both  cases  are 
illustrated in Figure 2.  
Paul  Cooper  has  previously  published  work1 
wherein  he  compiled  a  large  database  of  136 
separate  pressure-particle  velocity  measurements 
from  fourteen  different  explosive  formulations.  
These included both traditional CHNO explosives 
and those loaded with barium nitrate and tungsten.  
The  densities  of  the  explosives  ranged  from  1.13 
to  7.47  gcm3.    He  found  that  the  complied  data 
could be described by the form 
Where  P  and  u  are  the  pressure  and  particle 
velcocity and the CJ subscript denotes their value 
at  the  CJ  point.    Cooper  found  coefficients  a   
2.412  b    -1.7315  and  c    0.3195  for  PPCJ   
0.08.    This  fit  was  constrained  so  that  PPCJ 
exactly at uuCJ by requiring a  b  c  1. 
For  reduced  pressures  PPCJ    0.08  he 
with m  235 and n  -8.71.  These fits have been 
to  estimate  detonation  properties  by 
measuring the shock driven into air9 although the 
impedance  mismatch  makes  precision 
measurements difficult.  
impedance  matching  used 
estimate  the  CJ  condition  from  measurements  of 
the  shock  driven  into  an  inert  window  material.  
The CJ condition is overestimated in both the case 
where  the  detonation  product  gases  have  a  lower 
shock  impedance  than  the  window  material  A 
and  in  the  case  where  they  have  a  higher 
impedance than the window material B. 
At the CJ point the slope of the equation 1 
This can be used to estimate PCJ from experiments 
such as those depicted in Fig 2.  With a measured 
pressure and particle velocity Pw and uw of a shock 
driven  into  an  inert  window  material  the  CJ 
where  we  have  used  the  relation  PCJ    uCJ
neglecting  atmospheric  pressure  and  material 
initially at rest. Using the fit parameters proposed 
by  Cooper  this  gives  a  slope  of  -1.0925
roughly 9 higher than the theoretically predicted 
This  slope  can  be  corrected  by  placing  a 
second restraint on the fit of the experimental data.  
We refit the data with the dual requirements that a 
  b    c    1  and  b    2c    -1  where  the  first 
requirement  enforces  the  fit  to  pass  exactly 
through  the  CJ  point  and  second  fixes  it  slope  at 
the CJ point.  Cooper also fit a power law to the 
lower pressure regions of the curve.  We refit the 
power  law  using  the  same  technique  so  that  a 
continuous  isentrope  could  be  used.    We  also 
found  it  useful  to  adjust  the  crossover  point 
between these two fits.  For pressures above PPCJ 
This  fit  has  an  R2  value  of  0.789  compared  to 
Coopers value of 0.806.  Both of these improved 
fits and the original data are shown in Figure 3.  
We can again use the relation PCJ  uCJ
eliminate  uCJ  in  favor  of  the  more  commonly 
Fig. 3. The fit of Eq. 4 and 5 and the original data 
used.    Results  are  plotted  on  both  a  linear  scale 
top and a log-log scale bottom.  The crossover 
point  between  the  quadratic  and  power  law  fit  is 
As  a  test  of  the  usefulness  of  this  proposed 
estimate  for  a  universal  P-u 
examined  data  from  a  previous  paper10  which 
sought  to  introduce  a  correction  to  the  acoustic 
approximation  through  the  use  of  the  Riemann 
integral  calculated  from  cylinder  test  data.  This 
paper revised earlier work11 on PETN which   had 
This  fit  was  found  to  have  a  R2  value  of  0.947 
compared  to  a  value  of  0.957  using  Coopers 
original  values.    Thus  nearly  as  good  a  fit  was 
that  originally  obtained  while 
eliminating  one  free  parameter.    Second  form  of 
Eq.  4  emphasizes  that  this  fit  is  second  order 
correction  to  the  acoustic  approximation  near  the 
CJ point since the acoustic approximation is given 
by the first two terms.  
For pressures below PPCJ  0.1 the data are 
made  use  of  the  acoustic  approximation.  The 
correction  factors  obtained  from  using  the  P-u 
isentrope developed here were typically within 1015 of those obtained from the more complicated 
integration method used in Ref 10.  A comparison 
of  correction  factors  obtained  from  the  Riemann 
integral  to  those  obtained  from  both  Eq.  4  and 
from  Ref.  1  are  shown  in  Figure  4.    Corrections 
based on the original fit of Ref. 1 often produces 
corrections  of  the  wrong  sign  which  is  a  direct 
consequence  of  its  incorrect  slope  near  the  CJ 
point.    Corrections  based  on  the  empirical  P-u 
forms can be used even when cylinder test data is 
Fig.  4.  Correction 
approximation based on the Riemann integral from 
Ref. 10 compared to corrections based of empirical 
fits from Eq. 4 and Ref. 1. 
It  is  useful  to  use  this  fit  as  a  means  of 
estimating  the  accuracy  of  the  more  commonly 
used acoustic approximation.  Suggested rules-ofthumb of for its application are listed in Table 1. 
Table  1.    Suggested  ranges  of  accuracy  for  the 
acoustic approximation. 
A  previous  fit  to  experimental  data  suggests 
isentropeHugoniot  of  many  explosives  can  be 
approximated by the same curve when the pressure 
and  particle  velocity  are  non-dimensionalized  by 
their  CJ  values.    We  improve  upon  that  fit  by 
adding  a  constraint  which  forces  the  isentrope  to 
be tangent to the Rayleigh line at the CJ point.  A 
functional form containing a single free parameter 
was  shown  to  fit  the  data  almost  as  well  as  the 
original fit by Cooper.   
With  the  slope  corrected  this  form  is  shown 
to be more accurate at estimating the CJ condition 
from  small  scale  experiments  than  the  commonly 
used  acoustic  approximation.    Conversely  it  can 
be  used  to  estimate  the  range  of  applicability  for 
the acoustic approximation. 
While the fit seems to apply to a large number 
of explosives at many densities care must be taken 
formulations  that  are  significantly  different  from 
those whose data is compiled in Reference 1. Detonation Wave Parameters of PETN and CL-20 
A. Utkin12 V. Mochalova12 
1Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics RAS 
Chernogolovka Russia 
2Tomsk State University 
Abstract.  The  laser  interferometric  system  VISAR  was  used  for  investigation  of  the 
detonation wave structure of pressed PETN and CL-20 with different initial density. The 
laser beam reflected from a 200 m aluminum foil placed between the charge and water 
window. As the result of the experiment we have the velocity of the foil - water border 
which  represents  all  the  details  of  the  reaction  zone  structure  in  detonation  wave.  The 
possibility  of  implementing  of  a  steady-state  detonation  wave  without  Von  Neumann 
spike was investigated. Such unusual phenomenon was observed in some of HE RDX 
HMX  ZOX  TNETB.  It  was  found  that  Von  Neumann  spike  was  recorded  in  all 
experiments and the spike amplitude was very sensitive to the initial density of charge. It 
means  that  high  sensitivity  of  PETN  and  high  detonation  parameters  of  CL-20  do  not 
make sure the absence of spike in the reaction zone. 
steady-state  detonation  wave  consists  of  a  shock 
wave and a subsequent zone of chemical reaction 
where  the  pressure  decreases  and  the  substance 
expands  i.e.  a  Von  Neumann  spike  is  formed. 
Numerous  experimental  studies  confirmed  the 
validity  of  this  model  for  heterogeneous  HE. 
Authors2345678 showed however that a pressure 
increase  is  registered  in  the reaction  zone  instead 
of  spike  in  some  of  HE  RDX  HMX  ZOX 
TNETB. The assumption about the possibility of 
propagation  of  a  steady-state  detonation  wave 
without  spike  disagrees  with  classical  concepts. 
theoretical  models  which 
describe  the  chemical  reaction  inside  the  shock 
front and predict the existence of such regimes910. 
It is not clear whether the detonation wave without 
spike is a unique property of some HE or it reflects 
the general laws typical for powerful HE. It might 
be  supposed  that  such  regime  would  be observed 
for sensitive HE and for HE with high detonation 
parameters.  To  answer  on  this  question  we 
performed an experimental study of the influence 
of  initial  density  on  the  reaction  zone  of  steadystate detonation waves in pressed PETN and CL20. 
The scheme of experiments 
The scheme of experiments is shown in Fig. 
1. The detonation in investigated HE was initiated 
by  a  plane-wave  generator  1.  The  charge 
nature.  The  rate  of  chemical  reaction  is  specific 
property  of  individual  HE.  PETN  and  CL-20  are 
significantly different from RDX HMX ZOX and 
TNETB which were investigated earlier and it is 
clear the influence of initial density on the reaction 
zone structure in these HE. 
diameter  was  20-30  mm  and  the  length  varied 
from  30  to  40  mm.  A  laser  beam  was  reflected 
from 200 m Al foil 3 which was placed between 
the  end  of  the  charge  and  the  water  window  2. 
The  experimental  data  shows  the  velocity  of  Al 
foilwater boundary. The interferometer constant is 
measurements  which  are  accurate  to  10  ms.  At 
the same time in each experiment the detonation 
velocity D was measured using ionization gauges 
5.  The  second  time-reference  point  was  the 
interferometer signal which recorded the arrival of 
the detonation wave at the boundary of the HE and 
window.  The  accuracy  of  the  detonation  velocity 
measurements  was no worse than 0.2 or 0.01 
Fig. 1. The scheme of experiments. 
Typical  velocity  profiles  of  the  boundary 
aluminum foil  water for high explosive TNETB 
are presented in Figure 2678. The velocity of the 
foil  -  water  boundary  curves  2  and  4  decreases 
after  the  shock  jump.  Measured  duration  and 
amplitude  of  the  spike  are  determined  by  the 
detonation wave. The subsequent velocity increase 
is  caused  by  circulation  of  compression  and 
rarefaction waves in 200 m Al foil. 
Figure  2  shows  that  variation  of  particle 
velocity inside the reaction zone is very sensitive 
to the initial density 0 and initial particle size of 
HE powder. For coarse TNETB the particle size 
is 80 m instead of spike the increase of velocity 
is  recorded  after  the  shock  front  when  01.56 
gcm3 curve 1. For fine TNETB the particle size 
is 5 m the disappearance of Von Neumann spike 
is observed at 0  1.33 gcm3 curve 3. 
The main factor leading to the realization of 
nonclassical regimes without spike has a kinetic 
Fig.  2.  The  velocity  of  Al  foilwater  window 
boundary for the coarse TNETB the particle size 
is 80 m 1 - 01.56 gcm3 2 - 0  1.48 gcm3 
and the fine TNETB the particle size is 5 m 3 - 
0  1.33 gcm3 4 - 0  1.23 gcm3. 
PETN specimens of different initial densities 
were pressed from a powder with a mean particle 
size  of  500  m  Fig.3.  The  measured  particle 
velocity profiles and D0 for PETN are presented 
Fig.  3.  The  PETN  particles.  The  mean  size  of 
particles is 500 m. 
A  picture  typical  for  heterogeneous  HE  was 
the  high  amplitude  of  Von 
Neumann  spike  when  the  initial  density  was  less 
than  1.62  gcm3  Fig.4.  An  analysis  of  the 
experimental  velocity  profiles  by  means  of  using 
pressure-particle velocity diagram allows you to 
define  parameters  of  detonation  waves.  For 
example  at  initial  density  of  1.51  gcm3  particle 
velocities  in  Chapman-Jouguet  point  uCJ    and  in 
Von  Neumann  spike  uNS  are  equal  to  1.8    0.05 
kms and 2.6  0.1 kms respectively. So the ratio 
uNS uCJ is 1.5  0.1. The chemical reaction time is 
Fig.4.  The  particle  velocity  profiles  of  Al  foilswater  window  boundary  for  PETN  for  different 
When the initial density increases Fig.5 the 
reaction time does not change significantly but the 
ratio uNS uCJ decreases from 1.5  0.1 at 0  1.51 
gcm3    to  1.2    0.1  at  0    1.69  gcm3.  In  our 
opinion Von Neumann spike increases as density 
decreases  due  to  chemical  reaction  inside  the 
shock front. But initial rate of chemical reaction is 
not  enough  for  propagation  of  a  steady-state 
detonation wave without spike. 
Maximum  initial  density  was  equal  to  1.73 
gcm3 and Von Neumann spike was recorded in all 
experiments.  In  previous  works  it  was  found  for 
TNETB  and  RDX45678  that  the  structure  of  the 
reaction zone depends on the initial particle size of 
HE.  The  change  of  dispersion  affecting  the 
concentration and the size distribution of hot spots 
can cause a sharp change of macrokinetics of HE 
decomposition and lead to the qualitative changes 
in  the  structure  of  the  reaction  zone.  In  our 
experiments  coarse  PETN  specimens  of  different 
initial densities were prepared from a powder with 
a  mean  particle  size  of  500  m  Fig.3.  Maybe 
that is a reason why the disappearance of spike in 
the  reaction  zone  is  not  observed  at  high  initial 
density.  We  can  assume  that  in  fine  PETN 
specimens instead of spike the increase of pressure 
will  be  observed  after  the  shock  front.  As  an 
argument  of  this  assumption  we  can  consider  the 
results  presented  in  the  paper11.  The  authors11 
investigated  the  reaction  zone  structure  and  they 
did not record spike in agata PETN. 
Fig.5.  The  particle  velocity  profiles  of  Al  foilswater  window  boundary  for  PETN  for  different 
Fig.6. The dependence of the detonation velocity 
on the initial density for PETN  
Fig.6  shows  the  dependence  of  detonation 
velocity D on the initial density. It is interesting to 
note that the curve D0 has a break at 0  1.70 
gcm3. It can be connected with a negative oxygen 
balance  -10.1  of  PETN.  For  similar  HE  the 
detonation  products  have  a  free  carbon  which  is 
produced  in  diamond  phase  at  high  pressure  in 
Chapman-Jouguet  point  0    1.70  gcm3.  The 
measurements in paper12. But measuring accuracy 
in12  was  not  enough  to  observe  the  break  on  the 
80  ns  whereas  CL-20  detonation  parameters 
are  significantly  more  than  TNT.  For  example 
Chapman-Jouguet  pressure  of  CL-20  exceeds  40 
GPa at initial density of 2 gcm3. That is two times 
higher  than  for  TNT.  CL-20  sensitivity  is  also 
higher than TNT sensitivity. It would be natural to 
expect that the reaction time will decrease for CL20  but  experimental  results  do  not  confirm  this 
Similar experiments were made for CL-20. It 
is a powerful HE with a negative -10.9 oxygen 
balance  and  a  monocrystalline  density  of  2.04 
gcm3.  CL-20  specimens  of  different 
densities were pressed from a powder with a mean 
particle  size  of  200  m  Fig.7.  The  initial 
density changes from 1.63 gcm3 to 1.97 gcm3. 
Fig.8.  The  particle  velocity  profiles  of  Al  foilswater  window  boundary  for  CL-20  at  different 
Fig.7.  The  CL-20  particles.  The  mean  size  of 
particles is 200 m. 
The  experimental  results  for  CL-20  are  in 
Fig.8 9. As in the PETN Von Neumann spike is 
observed  in  this  HE  Fig.8  and  maybe  it  is 
connected  with  a  big  size  of  HE  powder  200 
m.  We  can  assume  that  in  fine  CL-20  samples 
the disappearance of spike in the reaction zone will 
Chemical  reaction  time    in  CL-20  exceeds 
fifty nanoseconds and it is unexpected result. This 
time  is  comparable  with  reaction  time  for  TNT 
Fig.9. The dependence of the detonation velocity 
on the initial density for CL-20. 
In  experiments  with  CL-20  the  detonation 
velocity  was  recorded  too  and  Fig.9  shows  the 
results  of  these  measurements  by  black  points. 
Detonation  velocity  can  be  approximated  by  the 
linear  relation  of  the  D  on  the  initial  density  for 
HMX13 D6.093.32 0  1.0 kmsec where 
the  density  is  measured  in  gcm3  dashed  curve. 
According  to  this  approximation  the  detonation 
velocity of CL-20 at monocrystalline density 2.04 
gcm3 is equal to 9.5 kms. 
It  follows  from  our  experiments  that  Von 
Neumann  spike  is  observed  for  all  investigated 
samples and chemical reaction time exceeds 50 ns. 
Therefore  high  sensitivity  and  high  detonation 
parameters do not make sure the absence of spike 
in the reaction zone. The possibility of detonation 
wave propagation without von Neumann spike can 
be realized in PETN and CL-20 by decreasing of 
initial size of HE particles. It is the object of our 
future investigations. Detonation velocity of a TATB-based high-explosive as a function  
of density temperature and curvature. 
Olivier Bozier Nicolas Desbiens Vincent Dubois Rmy Sorin 
CEA DAM DIF F-91297 Arpajon France 
Abstract. We aim at defining the evolution of the DnT0 0  law for a TATB-based 
composition.  The  experimental  device  consists  of  a  cylinder  of  this  composition  of 
different diameters 20 up to 60 mm and length 550 mm. Wave  shapes and detonation 
velocities were first measured at the same initial density 1.86 gcm3 and 2 diameters 20 
and 50 mm with various initial temperatures from -50C to 60C and after at ambient 
temperature with 3 initial densities from 1.67 gcm3 to 1.86 gcm3 and 3 diameters 40 
50 and 60 mm. The DnT0 0  law is calibrated on these 15 experimented rods and on 
40 former rate stick experiments. Then the celerity-curvature law obtained is valid over a 
wide range of temperatures and densities. We also extrapolate the DnT0 0  law at 0 
to estimate the CJ detonation velocity. 
The  detonation  velocity  Dn  of  an  explosive 
depends  on  the  initial  state  density  0  and 
temperature  T0  and  the  geometry  of  the  device 
curvature of the front . This study allows us to 
collect  new  experimental  data  to  improve  our 
knowledge  of  the  behavior  of  a  TATB-based 
composition  against 
temperature  density  and 
geometry. This leads us to define the evolution of 
the  DnT0  0    law  for  the  composition  over  a 
temperatures  densities  and 
curvatures. This work was inspired by Hill et al.1 
presented in a previous detonation symposium.  
For  this  purpose  we  lead  two  series  of 
experiments.  The  first  one  is  dedicated  to  the 
temperature effects and the second one deals with 
density  effect.  For  these  two  series  we  choose  a 
simple  detonation  rate  stick  in  which  detonation 
velocity  and  the  wave  front  at  the  end  of  the 
cylinder are recorded. In both cases a series of rate 
sticks was fired with different diameters in order to 
obtain  the  curvature  effect.  The  first  series  of 
experiments  consists  in  six  sticks  at  the  same 
Experimental devices 
Temperature effects 
initial  density  1.86 gcm3  and  2  diameters  20 
and 50 mm fired with various initial temperatures 
from   50 C  to   60 C.  The  second  series  of 
nine sticks was fired at ambient temperature with 3 
initial  densities  from  1.67 gcm3  to  1.86 gcm3 
and 3 diameters 40 50 and 60 mm. A DnT0 0 
 law is then calibrated on all of the experiments. 
The experimental set up consists in a TATBbased composition cylinder of diameter 50 mm or 
20 mm. A sketch of the device is shown on Fig. 1. 
The  detonation  was  ignited  at  one  end  by  a 
detonator through a booster and propagated along 
the  axis  of  a  cylinder  made  of  several  co-axial 
sticks. The rod length was 550 mm thus the length 
is  sufficient  for  the  detonation  structure  to  be 
established  and  conserved  up  to  the  end.  The 
explosive  was  embedded  inside  the  top  plate 
through  an  ionization  chamber  and  could  slide 
freely  inside  the  base  plate  in  order  to  accept 
Fig. 2. Example of streak camera view. 
For  each  temperature  - 50 C   20 C  and 
 60 C both diameters were fired simultaneously 
in the same temperature monitored box.  
The experimental set up consists in a TATBbased composition cylinder of diameter 60 50 or 
40 mm.  An  example  is  shown  on  Fig.  3.  As  the 
previous device the detonation was ignited at one 
end  by  a  detonator  through  a  booster.  The  rod 
length  was  550 mm.  The  density  of  the  TATBbased  composition  varies  from  1.67 gcm3  to 
Fig. 1. Sketch of temperature rate stick device. 
The detonation velocity on the lateral face of 
the  rod  D  was  recorded  along  2  meridians 
instrumented  with  20  optical  fibers.  Due  to  the 
temperature effect on the device expansion... we 
also  used  5  printed  electric  contacts  on  mylar 
support  CIF  inserted  between  sticks  with  a 
thickness of 0.1 mm. The detonation velocity was 
determined with the last 3 probes. The position of 
these  gauges  was  determined  in  such  a  way  that 
we have a sustained detonation and we can correct 
the effect due to the CIF. 
The  measurement  of  the  shape  of  detonation 
wave front at the end face of the rod was achieved 
by  imaging  a  diameter  line  with  a  mechanicoptical  streak  camera.  As  we  said  previously  the 
cylinder  was  embedded 
chamber.  This  is  a  transparent  window  PMMA 
that  creates  a  small  air  gap.  When  the  detonation 
reaches the end of the cylinder the air  is  ionized 
and a light signature appears cf. Fig. 2. 
Fig. 3. Example of density rate stick device. 
As  previously  we  used  2  bars  of  20  optical 
for  velocity  D  measurement  and  a 
mechanic-optical streak camera with an ionization 
chamber  for  the  shape  of  wave  front  at  the  end 
Detonation velocity 
The Fig. 4 resumes the experimental values of 
the detonation velocity D obtained for the 15 shots 
and  former  data  review2  40  rate  sticks  with  6 
fronts.  All  these  results  take  into  account  the 
thermal expansion due to the initial temperature. In 
the  case  of  the  temperature  effect  we  used  two 
different types of probes optical probes and CIF. 
Experimentally  we  can  conclude  that  the 
velocity  of  detonation  between   50 C  and 
 60 C  is  almost  independent  of  the  temperature 
in a cylinder with a charge diameter of 50 mm. On 
the  other  end  for  the  20 mm  rod  the  detonation 
temperature and increase with it. 
Fig. 4. Experimental detonation velocity. 
The wave shapes are plotted in Fig. 5 for the 
six temperature-effect shots and in Fig. 6 for the 
nine  density-effect  shot.  For  each  shot  we 
determine  a  magnification  factor  that  takes  into 
account the effect of temperature and the specific 
geometric  configuration.  We  applied 
corrections on the front measurements  for tilt and 
alignment defaults. 
As  expected  the  local  curvature  is  more 
the  small  diameter.  We  also 
observed  that  the  curvature  increases  when  the 
temperature  decreases  but  seems  to  be  less 
dependent to the initial density. 
Fig.  5.  Experimental  wave  forms.  Temperature 
Fig.  6.  Experimental  wave  forms.  Density  effect 
We  used  the  form  developed  by  Hill  et  al.3. 
This is a convenient form of celerity-curvature law 
to reproduce both the non- ideality of the TATBbased  explosive  and 
the  variation  of  scaled 
parameters with temperature and density. This law 
expresses as follows 
With    the  local  curvature  dCJ  and  CJ  the 
detonation celerity and width at normal conditions 
0T0. The functions f1 f2 and f3 are of the form 
f1 is the function used by Hill to fit the Dnc 
curve of TATB explosive PBX9502. The functions 
f2  and  f3  do  not  have  the  same  coefficients 
ai bi ci di with i  2 or 3 but have similar forms. 
As we have no information on how the detonation 
width  may  vary  with  density  or  temperature  we 
kept  the  quadratic  evolution  for  both  parameters. 
Thus  we  have  14  parameters  to  calibrate  this 
Methods  for  calculating  detonation  front 
The calibration of the model is first based on 
the results of the 15 shots presented here. We also 
add  former  data  review2  40  rate  sticks  with  6 
fronts  to  refine  it.  In  these  data  the  diameter 
varies  from  9  to  200 mm  the  temperature  range 
was - 45 C to  80 C and the density range was 
1.77  to  1.86 gcm3.  But  the  lack  of  information 
retrieved  on  device  control  or  measurements 
precisions  lead  us  to  consider  large  uncertainties 
on this old data set and a lower confidence than for 
recent  data  cover  a 
temperature  range  from  - 50 C  to   60 C  and  a 
density range from 1.67 to 1.86 gcm3. 
With  this  dataset  we  can  perform  a  direct 
resolution  of  the  ordinary-differential  equations 
ODE to approximate the fronts.  
that  propagates  at  D0 
Assuming  a  stationary  detonation  front  of 
axisymmetric cylinder one can show that the total 
curvature at any point of the front can be written 
with  zsr  and  zsr  being  the  first  and  second 
local  derivatives  of  the  front  zsr.  In  the  case  of 
planar  slab  geometry  the  above  equation  reduces 
to its first term that we name s. The second term 
corresponds to the axisymmetric contribution. If  
is  the  angle  between  the  normal  to  the  front  and 
the axis of the tube one can write 
with Dnr the local celerity of the front at radius r. 
Then the axisymmetric contribution can  
be  re-written  as  sinr  and  the  total  curvature  c 
Using geometric considerations and rewriting 
the  above  equation  in  terms  of  wave  front  path4 
one  can  show  that  the  shape  zs  and  the  radius 
r  are  described  by  the  following  differential 
Given  a  set  of  parameters  and  the  initial 
conditions  T  the  celerity-curvature  law  Dnc 
is known. With this law Dnc we search for each 
cylinder  the  velocity  Dcalc  that  permits  to  respect 
the condition redge2 through the integration 
of the ODE from 0 to edge. Then we have the 
propagation  velocity  Dcalc  and  the  front  shape 
zcalcr of all the cylinders at initial conditions T 
that correspond to the law Dnc. 
Then  with  this  procedure  we  can  directly 
calibrate  a  celerity-curvature  law  Dnc  and  the 
associated  edge  angle  edge  by  comparing  the 
calculated  velocities  and  shapes  to  the  measured 
ones  for  several  diameters  and  initial  conditions 
density and temperature.  
The  edge  angle  has  no  reason  to  be  constant 
all  over  the  density  or  temperature  range  so  we 
add  a  linear  variation  with  both  initial  conditions 
T of the following form 
This  formulation  adds  three  more  parameters  to 
calibrate but increases the accuracy of the fit.  
The procedure used to calibrate the parameters 
of  the  celerity-curvature  law  model  is  similar  to 
those  used  by  Hill  et  al.1.  To  minimize  the  merit 
function  we  used  a  Monte-Carlo  to  explore  the 
parameters  space.  As  for  Hill  et  al.1  the  merit 
function E is a weighted linear combination of the 
differences  between  modeled  and  experimental 
considered error EV and the front shapes of error 
the  detonation  velocities 
Where  Dmeasi  and  Dcalci  are  respectively  the 
measured  and  modeled  celerity  Di  the  standard 
deviation on the measure and nV the number of rate 
sticks  considered.  Di  permits  to  weigh  between 
the data recently obtained and where the process 
of  the  measurement  is  completely  known  and 
those whose value is just known. 
Where  tmeas  and  tcalc  are  respectively  the  mi 
measured and modeled time points of the nF front 
shapes  considered.  As  Di  ti  is  the  standard 
deviation of the measure that weighs the data. 
The calibration of the model described above 
lead us to a DnT0 0  law that reproduces pretty 
well  our  experimental  data  with  an  accuracy  that 
matches  measurement  uncertainties  for  the  recent 
data. The standard deviation of the model is 17 ms 
for the velocity and is 6 ns for the shape. The Fig. 
7  represents  the  calculated  detonation  velocity 
against  the  experimental  ones  the  x  error  bars 
deviation. We can see that the quasi totality of the 
experimental  points  is  well  described  by  the 
The  quantities  subscripted  best  are 
minimized  values  of 
irrespectively  to  the  others.  This  composite  merit 
function permits to minimize the parameters of the 
celerity-curvature law on two different errors that 
do  not  compare  directly.  The  weighted  parameter 
w is chosen as 23 as for Hill1 because it permits 
to  render  a  better  calibration  on  the  detonation 
velocity  and  keeps  enough  precision  on  the  front 
The detonation velocity error is given by 
Fig. 7 Calculated against experimental detonation 
velocities for the complete data set. 
The  DnT0  0    law  allows  us  to  draw  the 
evolution  of  the  local  detonation  velocity  against 
curvature  for  a  wide  range  of  temperature  or 
density. The resulting surface at 0  1.86 gcm3 is 
shown  in  Fig.  8  and  the  one  at  T0   25 C  in 
Fig.  9.  We  observe  that  the  evolution  of  the  Dn 
law  against  temperature  shows  the  same  trends 
than  those  reported  by  Hill  and  Aslam3  for  their 
TATB explosive. As the temperature increases the 
CJ  detonation  velocity  D0  decreases.  This 
behavior was expected since it was observed with 
the CARTE thermochemical code5. 
Fig.  8.  DnT0  0    calibration 
and  becomes  less  dependent  to  the  curvature  and 
more resistant to the extinction. 
The Fig. 9 shows that the trends observed with 
temperature are also observed with the density but 
with  the  opposite  variation.  Thus  as  density 
decreases  the  CJ  detonation  velocity  D0  and 
width    both  decrease.  The  consequences  are 
similar  than  those  previously  observed  the  slope 
of the Dn law and max increases when the density 
This observation shows that an important part 
of the T variation and thus of the Dn law may 
be ascribed to the density variation. Indeed when 
the  temperature  varies  the  explosive  is  subjected 
to  thermal  expansion  and  its  density  varies.  The 
variation of the reaction rate seems then to be due 
to  the  local  density  as  the  density  decreases  the 
reaction  rate  increases  regardless  to  the  energy 
liberated by the detonation.  
The Fig. 10 represents the variation of  with 
the density. We have also drawn the results  from 
Hill  and  Aslam3.  One  can  see  that  for  the  same 
range  of  densities  our  calibrated  model  predicts 
higher  detonation  width  than  those  predicted  by 
Hill3 even for their lot showing the highest width. 
Moreover the slope of the variation we observe is 
difference of detonation width we infer that even 
if  our  respective  explosives  are  similar  and 
propagate  at  quite 
respective  reaction  rates  and  extinction  limits  are 
they  obtained.  From 
the  same  velocities 
Fig.  9.  DnT0  0    calibration  surface  with 
We  also  observed  that  the  detonation  width 
T  decreases  when  the  temperature  increases. 
This  trend  has  for  consequence  that  the  slope  of 
the  Dn  law  which  is  always  negative  increases 
with the temperature. Moreover the decrease in   
produces  a  dramatic  increase  of  max  with 
temperature  as  already  observed  by  Hill1.  This 
evolution indicates that the reaction rate increases 
Fig.  10.  Evolution  of  the  modeled  width  of 
detonation    with  density.  Comparison  with  the 
results from Hill and Aslam3 
This  observation  is  coherent  with  the  Corner 
Turning  CT  experiments67.  We  have  measured 
for  the  nominal  TATB  explosive  tested  here  CT 
configuration  booster  size  explosive  density 
Cox7  experiments  on  PBX9502  shows  distances 
below  10 mm.  A  short  CT  distance  indicates  that 
the explosive propagates more easily through high 
curvature  conditions  and  corresponds  to  a  greater 
extinction limit. We conclude that PBX9502 has a 
higher  reaction  rate  compared  to  the  TATB 
explosive tested here as observed in our respective 
model calibration  is shorter for PBX9502. 
We  observe  that  the  variation  of    is  not 
linear.  As  we  allowed  a  quadratic  variation  over 
the range of density experimented we see that the 
calibration  tends  to  a  minimum  of    around 
1.66 gcm3. Although we do not have data of rate 
stick with density below 1.65 gcm3 to confirm the 
presence  of  a  minimum  this  tendency  and  the 
resulting  maximum in max is consistent  with the 
observation8 of an increase of sensibility to the gap 
test  for  TATB  when  the  density  of  the  samples 
decreases  to  1.6 gcm3.  Indeed  the  shorter  the 
detonation  width  the  higher  the  reaction  rate 
which  leads  to  an  ease  of  ignition  and  a  better 
resistance to extinction. We believe in the presence 
of a minimum because at a certain value of density 
the  energy  production  might  not  be  sufficient  to 
compete with the local loss due to high curvature. 
So the limit of extinction should decrease and  
would then increase. 
The Fig. 11 shows the variation of scaled CJ 
detonation velocity with the density. We have also 
drawn the CJ detonation velocity predicted by the 
CARTE  thermochemical  code5.  One  can  see  that 
D0  from  the  calibrated  model  slightly  diverges 
from  a  linear  evolution  for  the  lowest  density 
tested. This divergence is small but noticeable. We 
expect  to  perform  lower  density  tests  up  to 
1.4 gcm3  to  confirm  the  divergence  of  D0  and 
measure the value of the velocity gap created with 
the linear extrapolation.  
This  behavior  was  expected  as  shown  by  the 
CARTE code results5 dotted line for carbon rich 
explosive.  The  velocity  gap  expected  from  the 
thermochemical calculation is certainly due to the 
carbon phase produced in the detonation products. 
For high-density explosive the flow conditions at 
CJ  point  are  such  that  the  predominant  carbon 
phase  is  diamond-like.  At  lower  density  the 
diamond  phase  disappears  and  graphite  phase  is 
thermodynamic properties between the two carbon 
phases  modifies  the  gaseous  detonation  products 
and  induces  a  variation  of  detonation  velocity. 
Detonation velocities in carbon rich explosive such 
as TNT and HNS exhibit the same behavior5 when 
the density decreases.  
Fig. 11. Variation of D0 with density. 
With  the  data  collected  from  this  work  and 
older  ones  on  detonating  cylinders  propagation 
celerity D0 and shape of different diameters and at 
temperature  we  calibrated  a  celerity-curvature 
law function of the initial density and temperature 
for this TATB-based composition. 
One of the main challenges of this study was 
to  realize  sticks  at  a  lower  density  than  classical 
TATB-based composition. Thus the major add of 
this  work  is  to  collect  experimental  data  at  low 
initial  density  down  to  88  of  the  nominal 
The calibrated DnT0 0  law is valid over a 
wide  range  of  temperature  from   50 C  to 
 60 C  and  density 
dexplosif    base  de  TATB  Journe  de  la 
Dtonique Tours 2013 
7 Cox M. and Campbell A. W. Corner Turning 
in  TATB  7th  International  Symposium  on 
Detonation Annapolis 1981 
8 Belmas R. La transition choc-dtonation dans 
les  explosifs  solides  htrognes  Rapport  CEAR-6021 2003 
1.87 gcm3. At constant density the celerity Dn for 
the  curvature  0  decreases  with  the  temperature 
and  at  constant  temperature  Dn0  decreases 
with  the  density.  As  other  works  conclude  like 
Hill  et  al.1  we  also  note  that    increases  with 
temperature. Moreover one of the principal results 
of this study is that when 0 decreases  increases 
within the range of 1.67-1.87 gcm3. 
The  calibrated  scaled  Dn  equation  exhibits 
trends for D0 and  that allows analysis for 
respectively  energy  variation  of  the  detonation 
products  and  sensitivity  of  the  explosive.  We 
intend to continue this exploration of low density 
TATB  up  to  1.4 gcm3  and  confirm  the  trends 
revealed in this study. 
The  authors  thank  the  experimentalists  from 
CEALe Ripault who provided us with the TATBbased composition. Analysis of the Equation of State and Initiation Model for TATB-based LX-17
Seth Root and Leah Tuttle
Sandia National Laboratories Albuquerque 87125
Abstract. The unreacted equation of state EOS for energetic materials is determined
using standard shock or shockless compression experimental methods. For the detonation
products the EOS is typically determined from cylinder expansion tests or the sideways
plate push test. The difculty with these experiments is that the metal acceleration is not
a one-dimensional problem. The tests also require the use of an initiation model which
requires analysis as well. In this work we perform a series of plate-impact experiments
to examine the initiation model and detonation product EOS of the TATB-based explosive
LX-17. The LX-17 samples are backed by various thicknesses of well-characterized metal
buffers Al Cu and Ta and velocity interferometry measures the velocity proles at a
metalLiF window interface. The experimentally measured velocity proles are compared
to simulations to determine the effectiveness of the models and optimization methods are
used to suggest improvements to the models.
The equation of state EOS of energetic materials is important for understanding performance and
safety of an plastic-bonded explosive PBX. The
unreacted EOS for a PBX is determined through
shock compression Hugoniot measurements1 and
shockless compression techniques using Sandias
VELOCE or Z-Machine2. Determining the EOS
of the detonation products is a more difcult task.
Principal methods used to determine the product
EOS are cylinder expansion test3 or the sideways
plate push test4. These experiments are inherently
multi-dimensional problems which may introduce
complications in the analysis. In the 1940s Goranson performed one-dimensional experiments using
a plane-wave generator to initiate an explosive of
interest5. The explosive was backed by a metal plate
of various thickness and the free surface velocity of
the metal plate was measured using contact pins.
Plotting the free surface velocity versus the metal
plate thickness Goranson was able to examine the
reaction zone width and detonation product EOS.
Recently Vandersall et al. used a double shock
conguration to examine the reacted EOS of LX17.6 In those experiments the authors found that
a JWL EOS and Ignition and Growth model were
able to reasonable reproduce the double shock behavior but because of the lack of fast kinetics in
the models could not obtain ideal matches to the
experiments. In this work we use a modied version of the Goranson metal plate acceleration experiment to test the initiation model and the detonation
product EOS for LX-17. LX-17 is a triaminotrinitrobenzene TATB based explosive with nominally
7.5 binder by weight. TATB-based explosives are
of interest because of their extreme insensitivity to
impact. LX-17 has been studied under several con
485
ditions and several models exist for the detonation
products. We examined potential EOS models for
the unreacted and reacted LX-17 as well as the initiation model using CTH simulations and comparing
to our experimental results. Optimization methods
are used to modify model behavior to match experimental data.
Experimental Approach and Results
For the experiments discussed here we used LX17-1 manufactured by Holston Defense Corporation
with lot number HOL87M851-010. Analysis of the
blend showed an average of 92.5 TATB and 7.5
Kel-F 800 with trace amounts of other volatiles.
All experiments were conducted using the
90mm-bore powder gun at Sandias STAR facility.
The gun is capable of accelerating projectiles up to
2.2 kms which is sufcient to initiate an LX17
sample in a short run-distance. A schematic view
of the experiment is shown in Fig. 1. All experiments used a copper impactor 12.7 mm in thickness accelerated to approximately 2 kms that impacted the LX-17 sample. The metal inerts were
aluminum copper or tantalum with thicknesses
ranging from 1 mm to 4 mm. The Ta was specied as Annealed ASTM-B-708 RO5200 the Cu
was OFHC ASTM F68 the aluminum was as 6061T6. We used EpoTek 301 epoxy to bond the LX17InertLiF sample stacks. An aluminum mirror
was coated on the LiF bonding surface and the rear
surface was anti-reected coated for 532 nm. A 19channel velocity interferometry system for any reector VISAR was used to measure the wave prole at the inert-LiF window interface. VISAR was
also used to determine the projectile tilt by detecting
impact at the LiF windows around the samples. We
used 1.2739 for the VISAR correction for LiF7 because it was the latest measurement of the LiF correction factor. Using the VISAR correction factor
of 1.2808 results in velocities approximately 0.5
lower. We note that a new model for the correction factor has been recently published9 which may
change the velocity proles if applied.
Figure 2 shows an image of a target plate used
in the Ta experiments DP01 and DP04. The target
plate had 4 LX-17 samples per target plate. The LX17 samples and metal inerts were nominally 30 mm
in diameter. In later experiments we moved to the
Fig. 1. Schematic view of the experimental conguration. The top shows the modied Goranson conguration using the metal inert. The bottom shows
the conguration for the measurement of the detonation prole. The copper impactor directly impacts the LX-17 setting up a shock-to-detonation
transition in the sample.
large diameter target plate shown in Fig. 3. This
target plate conguration was used for the two experiments using copper and aluminum as the metal
inerts. The LX-17 sample is 70 mm in diameter instead of 4  30 mm individual samples. The larger
diameter sample allowed for VISAR windows to be
placed on the LX-17 to measure the detonation prole directly. Time of arrival of the detonation prole
was also used to correct for sample tilt within the
target plate. Table 1 details the four experimental
Experimental Results
The measured wave proles from the 4 experiments are shown in Figures 4-7.
stress in the explosive was calculated using the
quadratic Eqn 1 determined from shockless compression experiments.10 The run distance to detonation was determined using the Pop-Plot t to LX-17
0  1.9011 and is shown in Eqn 2.
USkms  2.411  2.177UP  0.406
Table 1. Experimental conguations
Imp. Stress Run-to-Det.
Fig. 2. Image of a completed target used for the Ta
experiments with individual target samples.
Fig. 3. Image of a completed large diameter sample
target used for the Al and Cu experiments.
Fig. 4. Measured velocity proles from experiment
Fig. 5. Measured velocity proles from experiment
DP04 using Ta inerts.
logx  4.53  0.12  3.22  0.10logP  2
Figure 4 shows the measured velocity proles
from experiment DP01. Looking at the wave prole from the with the 1 mm Ta sample we see
the Talyor wave response expected in a detonation
wave. As the inert buffer thickness increases we see
attenuation of the peak velocity at the inertLiF interface. In the 1 mm and 2 mm inert buffer proles
a second shock is observed due to the impedance
mismatches with the Ta inert. The velocity proles from DP04 shown in Figure 5 show similar
behavior as the DP01 velocity proles. The timing
is shifted between the two experiments because of
differing yer velocity which results in a different
shock velocity in the unreacted portion of the explosive and a different transition to detonation location.
Figure 6 shows the velocity measurements from
the experiment using aluminum inert buffer plates.
This experiment utilized the larger diameter explosive sample so that the detonation prole could be
measured directly the the explosive interface. The
proles from the three LX-17NaCl interface measurements are also shown in the gure. The three
detonation proles show the expected velocity behavior for a detonation indicating that detonation
did occur within the sample. The three proles
also provide an indication of our timing uncertainty
caused by projectile tilt sample offset in the target plate etc. For this experiment the timing un
Fig. 6. Measured velocity proles from experiment
DP10 using Al inerts.
certainty based on the NaCl detonation proles is
approximately 10 ns which could correspond to
20 m of tilt and offset uncertainty. The velocity
proles at the AluminumLiF interface again show
Taylor wave shape indicating detonation within the
LX-17. As the aluminum inert increases in thickness we see attenuation of the peak velocity at the
interface. We do not observe the second shock that
was observed in the Ta samples because of the lower
impedance of the aluminum inert buffers.
Figure 7 shows the measured velocity proles
from the experiment using Cu inerts along with
the measurement of the denotation prole at the
LX-17NaCl window interface. We see relatively
use SESAME Table 9876 that was recently constructed by Hobbs14 using the JCZS database15 for
LX-17. The EOS used for the inert materials impactor inert buffers Al Cu and Ta and the LiF window were all Mie-Gruneisen with the parameters
listed in Table 2. We also implemented a SteinburgGuinan strength model for the materials using the
parameters listed by Steinberg.16
Prior to performing the CTH simulations of the
experiments we needed to optimize the HVRB parameters to ensure consistency with the Pop-Plot
data from Jackson17 and Gustavsen.11 The data
from Jackson and Gustavsen were used because of
the similarity in initial densities. For the HVRB optimization we run a series of 1D simulations to generate synthetic Pop-plot data using the BCAT module included with the CTH code. The sum of the
squares of differences between the experimental t
to the Pop-plot data and the synthetic data is minimized by varying two of the HVRB parameters. We
optimize the HVRB parameters using the quadratic
M-G for the unreacted LX-17 and the SESAME
9876 table and the results are compared to the experimental data in Figure 8. We note that the experimental data determines detonation by examining the
wave proles for the characteristic von Neumman
spike. In the BCAT code transition is determined
by looking at changes in shock velocity at different
locations in the explosive.
Figure 9 shows the results from the CTH simulations using the 2-parameter optimization of the
HVRB model for the copper inert experiment. Timing of the simulations is early by approximately
40 ns in each thickness which is outside of the estimated time uncertainty of the experiment. The initial peak velocity is good for the 1 mm inert but
tends to be lower for thicker pieces of copper. The
long term velocities were all lower than experimental measured. The results were similar for the simulations using the aluminum inerts shown in Fig 10.
Timing was early by approximately 40 ns and late
time velocities were all lower. However the peak
velocity was higher than the experimental value.
The comparison to the Ta inerts Figure 11 showed
better agreement with the velocity at early times but
in all Ta simulations the wave arrival was early in
the CTH simulations by 70-100 ns. Late time velocities are also lower than experimentally measured.
Fig. 7. Measured velocity proles from experiment
DP11 using Cu inerts.
good agreement in time between the NaCl windows.
When compared to the NaCl window measurements
in Fig 6 the NaCl-B and NaCl-C measurements
match well in time. NaCl-A lies  10 ns outside
and may be an indication of some internal porosity
or warping in the target. The velocity proles at the
CuLiF interface show the Taylor wave decay and
a decrease in peak velocity as the sample thickness
increases. The sharp spike at the top of the peak
is likely caused by the VISAR detector and in the
fringe addition and is not a real effect. With the
higher impedance of the Cu buffers we again see
the second shock in the proles later in time. Further experiments using thinner inerts could provide
an alternative measure of the reaction zone and using multiple thicknesses of LX-17 would further test
the unreacted - initiation model - reacted products
Simulations were performed using Sandias CTH
shock physics code.12 The simulations requires
the unreacted EOS model the
initiation model and the detonation product EOS
model. For the unreacted EOS model we use the
quadratic Mie-Gruneisen listed in Eqn 1. The initiation model we use is the 5-parameter History
Reactive Variable Burn HVRB.13 Two parameters in the model are used to calibrate against Popplot data while the other 3 parameters control rate
and threshold. For the detonation product EOS we
Fig. 9. Comparison of the CTH simulation results using the optimized HVRB parameters and the
Hobbs SESAME table for the detonation products
for experiment DP11 with copper inerts
Fig. 10. Comparison of the CTH simulation results using the optimized HVRB parameters and the
Hobbs SESAME table for the detonation products
for experiment DP10 with aluminum inerts
Fig. 8. The synthetic data produced in the HVRB
model optimization using both the updated Hobbs
and 8202 SESAME tables compared to the experimental Pop-Plot data and corresponding t.
Table 2. Mie-Gruneisen parameters used for in the
We note that using a different unreacted EOS such
as the linear relation US  2.33  2.32UP from the
LLNL Handbook18 had only a few ns difference in
Figure 12 shows a comparison between using the
updated Hobbs SESAME table and the SESAME
8202 table. Both tables show reasonable agreement
with the experimental velocities but the SESAME
8202 results arrive earlier in time compared with the
results using the Hobbs SESAME table. The experimental denotation velocity for LX-17 is 7.63 kms.
The new Hobbs table has a detonation velocity of
7.59 kms SESAME 8202 has a detonation velocity of 8.09 kms. While it is possible to optimize all ve parameters in the HVRB model to
the experimental data in Figs 4-7 to improve the
timing the resulting velocity proles are unsatisfactory in terms of prole behavior. The simulation results suggest that the HVRB model may have
Fig. 11. Comparison of the CTH simulation results using the optimized HVRB parameters and the
Hobbs SESAME table for the detonation products
for experiment DP04 with tantalum inerts
difculties in modeling highly non-ideal explosives
in such detailed experiments or that the detonation
product EOS needs renement and comparison to
more experimental data such as supra-compressed
shock Hugoniot measurements.19 We note that testing of HVRB and the EOS models by comparing to
the embedded gauge work and to the cylinder expansion data was not performed and would likely
provide added value. Additional testing using the
JWL EOS and the Ignition and Growth model by
Tarver20 needs to be examined.21
We have conducted a series of modiedGoranson experiments5 to examine the equation of
state both unreacted and reacted of LX-17. The
experiments are purely 1-D which may eliminate
some of complexities inherent in the cylinder and
sandwich plate tests however the analysis does require knowledge of the Pop-Plot data. The experimental results were compared to CTH simulation
data to examine the EOS and the initiation model.
The initiation model was optimized to experimental Pop-Plot data using a M-G unreacted EOS and a
recently developed SESAME table for the reaction
products. The results of the simulations show early
time arrival of the transmitted wave and discrepancy
in the wave velocities. A full optimization of the
HVRB model improved the timing of the simula
Fig. 12. Simulation results for the copper inert experiment comparing the updated Hobbs SESAME
table and the SESAME 8202 table included in the
CTH EOS library. The unreacted EOS for all simulations is the quadratic M-G in Eqn 1.
tions compared to the experiments but still exhibited discrepancies in the velocity. In addition the
new HVRB parameters pushed the CTH synthetic
Pop-Plot to be less sensitive the the experimental
data. Further analysis into the detonation product
EOS and initiation model are needed.DSD calibration of PBX 9501 via slab geometry experiments
Carlos Chiquete1 Scott I. Jackson1 and Mark Short1
1Shock and Detonation Physics Group Weapons Experiments Division Los Alamos National Laboratory
Abstract. The Detonation Shock Dynamics DSD calibration for the plastic-bonded explosive PBX 9501 is revisited incorporating recent slab geometry tests conducted by Jackson and Short1. To address the question of which geometry slab or rate-stick may be
preferable for calibration we will present a series of PBX 9501 DSD calibrations obtained
using only detonation phase velocity and front shape measurements extracted from the slab
geometry tests for a number of Dn functional forms. The corresponding predictions
of the diameter effect curves are then compared to the available data. Calculations of the
thickness effect curve and slab front shapes from a previously obtained PBX 9501 DSD
calibration by Aslam2 based on cylindrical rate-stick experiments with two front shapes
obtained for a single charge-diameter are in turn compared to the new slab geometry test
data. The compatibility of the two data sets for DSD calibration of PBX 9501 is evaluated
To efciently calculate the timing and energy
delivery of a detonating explosive in a complex engineering geometry Programmed Burn PB
strategies3 4 have been developed to circumvent
the numerical difculties that arise from the large
scale disparity between the explosives reaction
zone width and the much larger geometric engineering length and time scales in a full continuum simulation. PB methods separate calculations of the timing of the detonation propagation through the explosive geometry from the energy delivery calculation.
The Detonation Shock Dynamics DSD modeling
methodology5 6 7 8 is a central aspect for the timing component of modern PB approaches replac
Approved for unlimited release LA-UR-14-24744
ing the detonation front and reaction zone with a
propagated surface evolved according to a specied
propagation law in which the normal detonation velocity Dn is a function of the local surface curvature . The theory is based on the assumption of
quasi-steady propagation of the front and small detonation front curvature with respect to the reaction
zone time and length scales5. Applying level set
techniques9 and an established Dn law the detonation front surface can then be propagated throughout a complex three-dimensional geometry providing accurate time-of-arrival predictions at any point
in the geometry. The conning material effect is
incorporated within the theory by specication of
the shock angle e at the interface between the explosive and inert conning material. In most cases
the propagation law is obtained using experimental
data involving diameter effect points and detonation
front shapes in a rate-stick conguration10. A key
question is then how calibrations obtained from the
more recently developed slab geometry tests compare to the conventional rate-stick approach.
In the present work the newly performed slab
geometry calibration tests are used to calibrate the
PBX 9501 Dn   relation for various functional forms. PBX 9501 is a polymer bonded explosive composed of 95.0 weight wt.  HMX
explosive crystals bonded with a binder mixture
of 2.5 wt.  Estane and a 2.5 wt.  eutectic
mixture of bis22-dinitropropylacetal and bis22dinitropropylformal BDNPABDNPF. PBX 9501
is considered to be a conventional or ideal high
explosive with a small reaction zone length scale
of O100 m a nominal detonation velocity of
8.8 mms and a failure charge-radius near 0.76
mm11. The resulting calibrations are used to calculate diameter effect curves which are then compared to the corresponding experimental data originating from the rate-stick tests. A previously obtained calibration of PBX 9501 by Aslam2 which
was based solely on data extracted from rate-stick
tests is in turn used to calculate a thickness effect
curve and compared to the experiments. The results
of these comparisons are discussed in terms of the
ability of the DSD calibration methodology to capture the complete set of data across the two test geometries.
PBX 9501 Slab Experiments
Slab geometry experiments are designed to generate a region of quasi-steady two dimensional ow
along the centerline of the explosive. This allows
the measurement of both detonation phase velocities and detonation front shapes at the breakout surface within this region. The explosive slabs in the
current study were unconned as in the previous
PBX 9501 rate-stick calibration experiments.
Eight slab tests were performed by Jackson and
Short1 with the PBX 9501 formulation. The slab experiments were boosted with a line wave generator
composed of XTX-8003 80 PETN and 20 silicone resin specically Sylgard 182 elastomer. The
PBX 9501 main charges were approximately 130
mm in length and 150 mm in width with thicknesses
varying from 0.88.0 mm. Slab densities were in
the range 1.8295-1.8334 gcc. The phase velocity of
Fig. 1. Size-effect data for PBX 9501. Blue cir
cles cid13 and red squares cid3 denote experimental slab
and cylindrical rate stick detonation velocities respectively a convention adopted throughout. The
insert on the lower left is the detail indicated by the
dashed rectangle near DCJ.
the detonation along the charge centerline was obtained through time-of-arrival TOA wires where
a least-squares linear t to the measured TOA wire
position and detonation arrival time produced the
phase detonation phase speed D0. The standard
errors associated with the linear ts were uniformly
less than 0.006 mms or about 0.07 the steady
phase velocity in relative terms. Note that 6 front
shapes were extracted from these tests all at different charge-thicknesses.
For comparison with a different geometry the
equivalent rate-stick data set for PBX 9501 consists
of a total of 12 diameter effect points and 2 front
shapes at a single charge-diameter12. The diameter
and thickness effect data is plotted in g. 1. The
horizontal axis is the inverse charge radius 1R for
the rate-stick geometry and the inverse slab thickness 1T for the slab geometry.
Front curvature analysis
The detonation front shapes across the slab shortaxis were digitized for the 1.00 1.98 3.00 3.99
0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.41R1Tmm18.28.38.48.58.68.78.88.9D0mmsSlabexp.dataRatestickexp.data6.00 and 8.01 mm thickness tests for a total of 6 data
sets. The necessary vertical and horizontal scaling
factors to extract the physical front shapes were determined from the detonation phase velocity streak
camera write speed and a pre-shot imaged ducial.
To determine a representation of the normal
velocity-curvature relation the experimental front
shapes were t to a form used by Hill13. This is a
series function form given by
where r is the distance from the center and the parameters ai and  0    1 are tting constants.
Here either n  1 or n  2 was chosen for tting
the slab front shape data to get a similar residual
Parameteric Dn   data
The slab normal velocity Dn and the front curva
ture  are found from the relations
where zcid48  dzdr zcid48cid48  d2zdr2. Use of a twice
continuously-differentiable C2 analytic function
for zr yields smooth values of the rst and second derivatives zcid48r and zcid48cid48r.
Analytic shock shapes of the form 1 were tted
to the raw experimental data for each test and are
shown in g. 2. Note the signicant local scatter in
the experimental shock shape due to the heterogenous nature of the PBX 9501 explosive with HMX
grain sizes on the order of 100 m14. The Dn  
relation derived for each test by using 2 is shown
in g. 3. For charge sizes of 1.98 mm and above the
Dn   curves overlap well up to 90 of the charge
thickness while there is some divergence beyond
90 for about   1.2 mm1. For the 1 mm
charge thickness there is signicantly more Dn 
variation over 90 of the charge thickness than for
charge sizes 1.98 mm and above and this is associated with the increased curvatures that are induced
across the front for small charges.
Fig. 2. Comparison of the shock shape log-form
ts eqn. 1 to experimentally imaged shock shape
data for each slab test.
Fig. 3. The Dn   data derived from eqns. 1
and 2 for each slab thickness. Circles represent
the Dn   variation up to 90 of the charge thickness while the triangles denote 99 of the same
0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5rmm0.30.20.10.0zmmT8.01mmT6.00mmT3.99mmT3.00mmT1.98mmT1.00mm0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.51mm6.57.07.58.08.59.0DnmmsT8.01mmT6.00mmT3.99mmT3.00mmT1.98mmT1.00mmDSD calibrations of slab data
To calibrate an explosive for DSD a functional
form for the Dn   relation must be specied and
its parameters systematically varied to optimally t
the available experimental data within the calibration procedure.
The calibration procedure used here is based on
the approach of Bdzil et al.15. To quantify the quality of a particular t a merit function is dened that
incorporates the error in the DSD-calculated detonation thickness effect currve and associated front
shapes into a single metric. The merit function used
represent the calculated and
experimental j-th shock shape point for the i-th test
0i are the calculated and experimenDcalc
tal detonation velocity for the i-th test NT E is the
number of thickness effect points N i
number of shock front coordinates for the i-th test
r is the total number of front
shape coordinate points and NF S is the number of
tests for which front shape data was obtained.
The merit function is structured with separate
thickness effect and front shape error components.
The factors Ei and Fi serve to nondimensionalize each errors contribution to the merit function.
Here the thickness effect and front shape errors
were scaled with the experimental detonation velocity and the charge-half-width of each test respectively. The relative contribution between the two
sets of errors is determined by the parameter w. In
the calibrations described below w was set to 0.76
slightly favoring a reduction in the thickness effect
error. The optimized parameters or parameterization of the Dn   relation is obtained by numerically minimizing the dened multivariable merit
In the following we present calibrations of
the thickness effect data and the associated front
shapes. The variations were obtained from cali
brating three separate Dn   functional forms. In
all cases the Chapman-Jouguet speed DCJ and the
edge angle e were xed in the optimization.
Rational polynomial form
The following standard Dn   functional form
is a polynomial in  given by
where the i are constants with i  0. The optimized parameters i along with xed DCJ and
e are given in table 1 note that 5 was not optimized and set to zero. The resulting global Dn  
curve is plotted in g. 4 along with the log-form
1 derived Dn   variation for each slab thickness. For smaller curvatures that cover 90 of
the charge thickness shown in the inset of g. 4
the Dn   variation derived from 4 follows the
closely grouped log-form ts. For larger curvatures
the calibrated Dn curve does not follow the general concavity of the log-form tted data while for
xed Dn it has a curvature toward the lower end
of the majority of the log-form tted experimental
Dn   data. This result is due to the inuence of
tting the 1 mm thickness effect point all thickness
effect points had equal error bias as it demanded
a steep downturn in the calculated thickness effect
curve to t the 1 mm charge size resulting in a comparatively large decrease in Dn as a function of .
Table 1. Optimized t parameters for the rational
polynomial Dn   function.
Table 2. Optimized t parameters for the exponential Dn   function.
The following Dn   functional form was also
applied in the calibration of the slab data
where A e1 C1 B C2 C3 C4 and C5 are the
tting parameters. Note that this is the form used
in the previous DSD calibration of PBX 9501 by
Aslam2. The result appears in g. 5 and parameter
values appear in table 2. When calibrated to the slab
data it was found that the contribution of the exponential term which drives greater variation in Dn
over a small span in  was relatively small in comparison to the results in Aslam2. This form captures
the general concavity of the experimental Dn  
shapes. Up to 90 of the charge width g. 5 inset
the exponential form again captures the Dn variation well but thereafter has too rapid a decrease in
Fractional power form
Lastly the Dn   functional form
was calibrated to the slab data set where E  and
 are the tting parameters. The result of this calibration appears in g. 6 and the parameters ap
498
Fig. 4. The Dn   variation from the optimized
polynomial function form eqn. 4 black line
compared with the various experimental log-form
ts of the slab front shapes.
Fig. 5. The Dn  variation from the optimized exponential function form eqn. 5 black line compared with the various experimental log-form ts of
the slab front shapes.
0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0mm16.57.07.58.08.59.0DnmmsDSDCalibrationRationalpoly.0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0mm16.57.07.58.08.59.0DnmmsDSDCalibrationExponentialFig. 6. The Dn   variation from the optimized
fractional power function form eqn. 6 black
line compared with the various experimental logform ts of the slab front shapes.
pear in table 3. Again we observe good agreement between the tted Dn   relation 6 and
the Dn   log-form t to the experimental data
that covers 90 of the charge width inset to g. 6.
Thereafter the Dn t 6 trends below the experimental data again due to a balance between tting
shock shapes and thickness effect data.
Table 3. Optimized t parameters for the fractional
power Dn   function.
Slab thickness effect and shock shape comparison
Figure 7 shows the thickness effect curves D0
vs. 1T  solid lines calculated from the three DSD
calibrations eqns. 4 5 and 6 shown against
the experimental thickness effect data points red
Fig. 7. The thickness effect curves D0 vs. 1T 
solid lines calculated from the three DSD calibrations eqns. 4 5 and 6 shown against
the experimental thickness effect data points red
squares. Also shown are the corresponding predictions of the diameter effect curves D0 vs.
1R dashed lines from the three DSD calibrations
eqns. 4 5 and 6 shown against the experimental diameter effect data points blue circles.
squares. The residual level in RMS is on the
order of the experimental velocity standard error
for all the calibrated curves. The polynomial and
fractional power ts slightly overestimate the thick
effects points at large slab sizes inset to g. 7
due to the way the functional forms require a more
rounded variation in Dn for small . Each of the
calibrations also had a similar level of error in terms
of the front shape data for example g. 8 shows the
results for the exponential Dn function.
Comparing to the rate-stick data
One of the major benets of a DSD formulation where the normal detonation velocity is a function of the local shock curvature is that its a geometry free representation. This implies that once
a DSD relation is calibrated in this case to the
slab geometry it should accurately capture detonation wave propagation timing in other geometries
such as cylindrical rate-sticks provided that the nor
499
0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0mm16.57.07.58.08.59.0DnmmsDSDCalibrationFractionalpower0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21Ror1Tmm18.28.38.48.58.68.78.88.9D0mmsDSDSize-eectRationalpoly.ExponentialFractionalpow.Fig. 8. The calculated front shapes for the exponential Dn   functional form 5 compared to the
mal detonation curvature primarily depends on local curvature. This is the basis behind recent work
on the geometry depend behavior of DSD for PBX
9501 PBX 9502 and ANFO by Jackson  Short1.
In this regard g. 7 also shows the corresponding
predictions of the diameter effect curves D0 vs.
1R dashed lines from the three DSD calibrations
eqns. 4 5 and 6 along with the experimental diameter effect data points blue circles. It is
clear that each DSD prediction for the diameter effect curve lies above the experimentally determined
curve. In fact the experimental data shows a size effect scale close to unity i.e when D0R  D0T 
and the ratio of charge radius R to the slab thickness T is close to unity. A similar issue in predicting the propagation in the alternative geometry was
found by Jackson  Short1 for the DSD prediction
of the PBX 9501 thickness effect curve using a previous DSD calibration of PBX 9501 rate-stick data
On the other hand Jackson  Short1 found that
for the more non-ideal HE PBX 9502 a DSD calibration based on the rate-stick geometry gives a
good prediction of the experimentally determined
thickness effect curve in the slab geometry. The
reason the thickness effect curve when plotted as
Fig. 9. The predicted total curvature along with the
separate slab and axisymmetric curvatures components for rate-stick radii R  1.005 mm shown in
blue and R  0.79 mm shown in in red.
D0 vs. 1T  lies to the left of the diameter effect curve when plotted as D0 vs. 1R can be
seen by examining the resulting slab and axisymmetric curvature components. These components
are plotted in g. 9 calculated from the Dn  
slab-derived t 5. For both rate-stick calculations
shown at R  0.79 and R  1.005 mms near the
origin the two curvature components are close in
magnitude. Thereafter the slab curvature component grows in magnitude relative to the axisymmetric component. This difference in curvature component variations across the charge underlies the difference in the size effect curves shown in g. 7 as
previously explained by Jackson  Short1. For a
Dn   based DSD description to reproduce the observed experimental data which has a scale factor
close to one it would require the slab and axisymmetric curvature components to be equal across the
Previous calibration of rate-stick data
Aslam2 has previously determined a Dn   relation for PBX 9501 based solely on calibration
to rate-stick geometry experiments12. Figure 10
shows a comparison between the rate-stick cali
500
0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5rmm0.40.30.20.10.0zmmT8.01mmT6.00mmT3.99mmT3.00mmT1.98mmT1.00mm0.00.20.40.60.81.0rmm0.00.51.01.52.02.5Curvaturemm1totalsslabaaxisymmetrictotalsslabaaxisymmetricFig. 10. The Dn   function previously found by
Aslam2 compared to the various experimental logform ts of the slab front shapes. Again circles represent 90 of the radial extent of each front shape
and the triangle denotes 99 in the same measure.
brated Dn   relation and the experimentally deIt is
rived Dn   curves for the slab geometry.
seen that the Dn   curve based on rate-stick geometry calibration has too rapid a decrease in Dn
with increasing curvature to match the slab geometry data even for small curvatures as seen in the
inset to g. 10. Although the Dn   relation derived by Aslam12 ts the rate-stick diameter effect
curve well the more rapid decrease of Dn with 
would lead to smaller phase velocities in the slab
geometry than observed experimentally and again
underlies the discrepancy in the size effect curves
shown in g. 7. In g. 11 the slab shock shapes are
compared with those predicted by the Dn   relation derived by Aslam2. Again the Dn   derived
shapes are generally too curved to match the slab
It is clear from the above that except for the
larger charge sizes a DSD formulation for PBX
9501 when calibrated to the slab geometry does not
reproduce the corresponding diameter effect curve
as closely as might be expected given that PBX
Fig. 11. The predicted front shapes by Aslams2
calibration of the rate-stick data compared to the experimental data.
9501 is an ideal explosive with a short reaction
zone. On the other hand a DSD formulation for
PBX 9502 provides a signicantly better representation of the size effect curve for equivalent values of the ratio of D0 to the Chapman-Jouguet
velocity1. There are a number of reasons for this.
One possibility is an issue with the PBX 9501 experimental data. For instance the rate-stick data
only had one charge size 25.4-mm diameter with
associated front curvature data. Manufacturing of
the small rate-stick charges could also be an issue
depending on whether the charges were pressed in
molds or cut from large billets. The large HMX
grains in PBX 9501 also can be an issue when machining to nal diameter where they can get easily
pulled out of the explosive.
Another possibility for the break down of the
DSD approach for PBX 9501 at smaller charge
sizes is that high-order effects become important.
These include front acceleration and transverse ow
effects which become relevant when order one
changes in the shock angle across the charge are
observed15. Figure 12 shows the shock angle across
the various slab charges as a function of distance
from the center of the slab both for the exponential
DSD t form and also derived from the log-t forms
0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0mm16.57.07.58.08.59.0DnmmsDSDCalibrationAslam20070.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5rmm0.40.30.20.10.0zmmT8.01mmT6.00mmT3.99mmT3.00mmT1.98mmT1.00mmFig. 12. Shock angle  in radians vs r for the various slab tests. The DSD calculations for the exponential functional form case appear in solid lines
and their experimental analogues derived from the
log-form ts appear as dashed lines.
to the experimental data. Figure 13 shows the corresponding magnitude of the higher-order DSD acceleration term DDnDt  D0 sin 2s based
on the DSD exponential functional form. For the
larger slab thicknesses order one changes in 
and DDnDt are only observed near the charge
edge. However for the smaller charges the acceleration terms become large across a signicant
section of the charge indicating that the phase velocities would likely be signicantly inuenced by
higher-order effects.The Detonation Connement Effect Theory Observations and Experiments
Larry G. Hill and Tariq D. Aslam
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 USA
Abstract. This paper examines the effect of conning materials on detonation propagation
in high-density solid explosives. We rst discuss the physical origins of connement and
distinguish between detonation wave and product connement. Next we present ideal connement theory called shock polar analysis and its three essential casesstrong weak
and stiffwhich we represent by Tantalum Ta Sylgard Sy rubber and Aluminum Al
conners respectively and PBX 9502 explosive. We then discuss how polar analysis
breaks down for real devices. Next we present carefully conceived experiments on the example materials PBX 9502 conned by Ta Sy and Al and compare the results to shock
polar predictions. Finally we present experimental results for a thin Sy layer backed by
thick Ta or Al and for a thin Silicone foam layer backed by thick stainless steel. Both thick
weak-layers and thin weak-layers backed by strong or stiff layers propagated unconned.
Introduction to Detonation Connement
The Velocity of Detonation VOD of a High Explosive HE charge is generally expected to increase when encased in a conning material. That
said many charges are large enough that detonation propagates at nearly the Chapman-Jouguet CJ
speed even if they are bare.
very strong connement barely increases VOD.
For example a 1-inch-dia. HMX-based bare
rate stick propagates at nearly CJ speed. Consequently its VOD is hardly affected by conning it
in the thick copper Cu tube used by the standard
Cylinder Expansion CYLEX test.
bare 1-inch-dia. PBX 9502 95 wt TATB 5 wt
binder charge detonates at 7.6 mms whereas
its estimated CJ VOD is 7.8 mms. Here there is
some margin so one would expect the corresponding CYLEX VOD to lie between these two values.
In reality although lot effects have not been fully
sorted out the 9502 CYLEX VOD is not higher
but remains at 7.6 mms. Thus real connement effects can be both complex and non-intuitive.
We discuss reasons why this is so and present experimental data on several important carefully controlled conned PBX 9502 congurations.
Physical Origins of Detonation Wave Connement
and its Distinction from Product Connement
Figure 1 shows a schematic drawing of a CYLEX
test with emphasis placed upon the wave structure.
The reference frame is shock-xed and the materials ow from left to right.
The detonation shock drives an oblique shock in
the tube wall which deects the material interface
outward. This compliance constitutes connement
loss relative to a rigid boundary which would be unyielding. The oblique shock reects from the tube
free-surface as an expansion wave and the structure
continues to reverberate in the tube wall with alternating sign and diminishing effect.
Fig. 1. Schematic of a CYLEX test in wave-xed
coordinates emphasizing wave structure and illuminating the origins of detonation connement.
Downstream of the detonation shock and within
the reaction zone lies the sonic surface ahead of
which the ow inuences as in drives the detonation shock and behind which it does not. The
material interface deection alters the ow pattern
between the shock and sonic surface which in turn
affects the shock shape and VOD.
The material interface deection lies between
values corresponding to two physical limits innite
connement i.e. a rigid wall on one end and zero
connement on the other. The unconned limit does
not correspond only to bare charges in a vacuum as
one might suppose instead we shall see that it may
occur for a variety of relatively insubstantial materials that include air foams plastics and rubbers.
This is because zero detonation connement actually occurs in response to any conner that causes
the sonic surface to meet the detonation shock at the
charge edge. However this condition is achieved
its effect is to isolate the shock from the lateral and
downstream surroundings thus causing it to propagate with the same shape and VOD as if the charge
were bare and its surroundings were evacuated.
If the head of the rst expansion wave returning
from the tube free-surface intersects the material
interface downstream of the point where the sonic
surface meets the latter as drawn in Fig. 1 then
the detonation shock is not inuenced by the freesurface. Consequently the effect on the detonation
is the same as if the wall thickness were innite.
There exists a critical conning-layer thickness
for which the two features meet the material inter
face at the same axial location. For smaller layer
thicknesses the connement effect decreases as the
layer thickness decreases vanishing as the latter approaches zero. Thin-wall behavior is probably more
intuitive than thick-wall behavior because it is qualitatively like the more familiar detonation product
Whereas detonation wave connement affects
detonation propagation detonation product connement constrains lateral product expansion. This effect operates over much larger times and distances
and is purely one of mass loading. Consequently
it does not depend on the wall density or thickness
alone but on the product of the two. More specically Gurney analysis tells us that product connement depends on the conner-to-HE-mass ratio.
Detonation Wave Connement and the DSD Model
Detonation Shock Dynamics DSD is a hierarchical
approximation to the reactive Euler equations used
to propagate curved detonation waves 1. The simplest and widely-implemented variant propagates
waves by a single mathematical functioncalled
the intrinsic relationwhich relates the local normal component of detonation speed Dn to the local total curvature . DSD theory only goes so far
as to reveal the functional dependence of the quasiunique Dn expression.
Its mathematical shape
must be discovered experimentally.
Besides a calibrated Dn curve for the considered HE DSD generally needs an angle boundarycondition BC at the charge edge. The exception
is if the angle between the edge and the emerging
wave is less than the sonic angle s which is the
value that occurs at the edge of a bare rate stick. For
such supersonic BCs the emerging wave does not
sense the presence of the charge edge but propagates as if the charge continued indenitely.
Supersonic BCs most commonly occur in congurations where detonation rst-breakout is tangential to some point on the charge surface.
cases the angle  between the wave and edge is zero
at rst emergence and generally increases as the intersection point propagates outward. At which point
 reaches s and would seek to increase beyond it
the detonation senses the charge edge and  quickly
establishes the value c which is consistent with
the connement condition where s  c  90.
We noted that many nominally-conned scenarios actually propagate unconned c  s. Even
for conned scenarios s still ags the timeplace
that a supersonic BC is lost and the conner is rst
sensed. This important sub-problem is considered
solved for PBX 9502 we previously measured the
fronts-value by two rather different methods
curvature rate stick 3 and failure cone 4. Both
yielded s-values see Figs. 1 and 2 of about 35.
Model Connement-Prescriptions RBM vs DSD
Reactive Burn Models RBMs simulate connement effects by directly computing details like those
rendered in Fig. 1. This method has its pros and
cons. The main advantage is automation one enters the best-known material properties for the HE
and conner and out pops the result. For example
if the layer thickness is less than the critical value
then the consequences are directly simulated. No
connement calibration is necessary nor are RBMs
able to directly incorporate them.
A disadvantage of RBMs is that one may not have
the computing power to spatially resolve thin conning layers much less to generate their interior
physical details see Fig. 1 that inuence connement. A prediction will be made but it may not be
realistic. Another RBM shortfall is that real-world
connement is affected by subtler phenomena like
air foam or rubber gapswhich RBMs generally
cannot resolveand viscosity heat conduction and
HE granularitywhich RBMs do not treat.
Because the DSD model is simpler than RBM
models its connement prescription must invoke
direct experimental calibration. By doing so it naturally incorporates multiple real-world connement
effectswhich may not be understood nor even
necessarily identiedin a way that RBMs cannot.
Thus not only is DSD much more computationally
efcient than RBM models it can also be more accurate for some problems.
From this point forward we shall consider DSDlevel detonation wave connement which no matter how complex the conner structure
is simply quantied by the c-value associated with the
HEconner pair. We shall rst consider theory
and experiments on single-conning-layers of supercritical thickness and then present experiments
on some more complex double-layer scenarios.
Next we show how c affects the shape Fig. 2
and VOD Fig. 3 of a steady detonation in the considered experimental conguration namely an 8mm-thick PBX 9502 slab. Both plots were generated by DSD using the Dn function from 2.
In Figs. 1 and 2 the quoted edge angle is shock
deection angle c which is the complement of c.
Both denitions naturally arise because -values are
most convenient to describe experiments whereas
-values are most useful in 3D computations.
Fig. 2. DSD calculations of steady detonation shock
shapes in an 8-mm-thick slab for the full admissible
range of conned edge angles c.
Fig. 3. DSD calculations of steady detonation
speeds in an 8-mm-thick slab vs edge angle c. The
points correspond to the Fig. 1 wave proles.
Figures 1 and 2 both illustrate that the connement inuence on VOD starts small as c is decreased from s.
In fact about half the effect is
realized in the last 2which as Fig. 2 indicates is
about a fth of the c-value of Tantalum Ta a substantial conner. From this exercise we learn that it
is evidently impossible to achieve near-perfect connement with real-world materials.
There exists an occasional misconception that the
connement effect depends only on the acoustic
impedance of the conner. In reality the simplestlevel effect depends on the conner shock properties
in relation to the HE inert-shock propertiesand
not on the acoustic impedance of either material.
The simplest theoretical construct is shock polar
analysis which was introduced to gasdynamics by
Busemann in 1931 5. Though details are murky
it was likely rst adapted to HE by von Neumann
in connection with his HE lensing contributions to
the Manhattan project 6. Then in 1966 Sternberg  Piacesi 7 rst applied polar analysis to
the conned HE slab PentoliteIron assuming the
polytropic equation of state EOS. Aslam  Bdzil
compared polytropic-EOS polars to numerical simulations 8 subsequent LANL work 9-12 has expressed polars in terms of Up-Us Hugoniots so as to
directly incorporate available shock wave data.
We now outline the concepts and assumptions.
Causality ensures that the two shocks meet at the
material interface. The HE cannot react instantly
and is virtually inert in the neighborhood of the node
point where the two shocks and the material interface meet. Material strength is much smaller than
the pressure imparted by the detonation thus deviatoric stresses are neglected. Both materials are
assumed to possess a Up-Us Hugoniot.
Under these assumptions one may derive a parametric pressureshock-deection-type polar curve
for each material which relates ow pressure P  to
streamline deection angle . Its form is unimportant for the present discussion but is given in 10.
The two materials are assumed to be in intimate
contact such that  must be the same for both. And
because material strength is negligible both materials behave as uids such that the material interface
cannot support any stress differential. Hence P is
the same for both materials in the neighborhood of
the interface. These dual physical requirements are
simultaneously satised where the P  curves for
the two materials cross. For this reason gasdynamic
parlance calls P - space a match plane.
We shall now discuss the details of the three essential shock-polar scenarios which have been previously named Strong Weak and Stiff connement
8 in the context of specic examples.
Figure 4 overlays PBX 9502 red and Tantalum
Ta blue polars. The red curve is one of two
branches. The alternate branchwhich applies to
the opposite side of the charge and negative interface deection anglesis its reection about the
ordinate. Full polar curves have a distinctive hot
air balloon shape. The blue curve is the truncated
right Ta branch its full form looks qualitatively like
Fig. 4. Shock polar construction for a strong connement example PBX-9502Ta.
The Fig. 4 inset is the shock-xed schematic
wave diagram associated with the polars. P and
 are determined by the match point m. Knowing m one may then nd the HE shock angle
m  c and the Ta shock angle m  c. All
three values apply only in the neighborhood of m
because the detonation shock conner shock and
post-shock material interface are all curved.
The ow downstream of a normal shock wave
is necessarily subsonic in the shock-xed reference
frame. Both shock waves in Fig. 4 are oblique for
which the downstream ow can be either subsonic
or supersonic in the shock-xed frame. Figure 4
indicates the regions of the PBX 9502 polar curve
for which the HE product ow is subsonic vs supersonic. For the strong connement case the HEproduct ow is subsonic and the post-shock conner ow is supersonic.
Figure 5 overlays PBX 9502 red and Sylgard 184
rubber Sy blue polars. The relative position of
the two polars is opposite that of strong connement. The case is more interesting because although there is an obvious match that solution is
not the one realized in most cases. The reason is
that the conner ow is subsonic for the explicit
match point. Consequently appreciable connement is felt only if the Sy layer is sufciently thin
that the detonation strongly senses a stiff backing
layer. In that case the explicit match can occur 10.
Figure 6 overlays PBX 9502 red and 6061 Aluminum Al blue polars. In this case the two polars do not cross at all. The only way that a solution
can occur is through a Prandtl-Meyer expansion in
the Al as shown by the dashed curve in Fig. 6. The
wave diagram inset of Fig. 6 shows that the Al shock
actually leads the HE shock in this scenario.
Fig. 5. Shock polar construction for a weak connement example PBX-9502Sy.
Typically the HE product ow expands to supersonic through a Prandtl-Meyer expansion fan as indicated by the dashed curve in Fig. 5. The postshock conner ow is likewise supersonic. The realized solution is signicantly weaker with respect
to match pressure than the explicit match point.
The leading expansion-fan characteristic in the
Fig. 5 wave-diagram inset comprises part of the
sonic surface which extends across the ow eld.
Thus the detonation shock and the sonic surface
join at the edge with no gap between them in contrast to strong connement thus isolating the shock
from the downstream detonation product ow and
from the conner. Recall from 1.1 that this is
the zero-connement criterion whether or not solid
material abuts the HE is not the relevant factor.
Fig. 6. Shock polar construction for a stiff connement example PBX-9502Al.
The Fig. 6 behavior seems like causal breakdown.
Shouldnt the detonation always pull the conner
shock forward and push the conner material outward just as for strong connement? Yet polar
analysis is a point solution the behavior can and
does take a different turn a short distance from the
match point. Numerical simulations show that the
anomalous behavior is real but only occurs within
O10 m of the interface 10. For longer experimentally resolvable distances the behavior is qualitatively like that of strong connement.
What is interesting about this stiff connement
example is that Al is neither rare nor exotic meaning that it is not merely an academic curiosity.
Nor is it a breakdown of shock polar theory because numerical simulations conrm its prediction.
Yet it is incompatible with DSD which as a long
wavelength theory does not accommodate localized
anomalous behavior. As such DSD requires relevant data from conned detonation experiments.
Real-World Effects on Detonation Connement
Shock polar theory assumes that the material layers
and their assembly are ideal. Because this is never
true for real devices an appreciation of non-ideal
effects is essential to the design of effective detonation connement experiments. Next we discuss two
general causes of connement non-ideality.
Gaps Between the HE and Conner
Liquids cast-cure and granular HEs are generally
poured into a containerconner. Because they are
uid no gap discounting possible cast-cure shrinkage forms between the HE and its container. Likewise putty-like HE materials may be packed into a
container without gaps. For solid explosive pieces
however gaps generally exist between the HE and
its intended wave conner.
For example if HE cylinders are to be red in
a tube an insertion tolerance is necessary to keep
the charges from binding. For the standard 1-in-dia.
CYLEX test our nominal tolerance-gap is  1
In most other scenarios insertion toler13 m.
ances are far more generous. Even slab congurations have gaps in the usual situation where the surfaces are not extremely at and uniformly loaded.
Although this O10 m gap seems diminutive
it is comparable to the PBX 9501 95 wt HMX 5
wt binder CJ reaction zone thickness CJ which
is 25 m by 13. From Fig. 1 and its associated
discussion substantial isolation of the detonation
from its conner is expected in such cases.
For PBX 9502 however CJ is O1000 m. By
the CJ measuring-stick argument one would not
expect an O10 m air gap to compromise connement yet as noted in 1 negligible effect is realized in CYLEX. The likely reason is the fact that
9502 has an HMX-like reaction-zone component
e.g. the WSD model 14 has a CJ half-reaction
thickness of 30 m followed by a long tail. The
fast component may control wave connement.
There is another possible explanation. Detonation products jet ahead through even very narrow
gaps 15 such that their gasses might pre-shock
and deaden insensitive TATB-based HE near the
charge edge. Reaction quenching or even retardation in an edge layer would slow detonation. It is
further conceivable that the connement and jetting
effects virtually cancel for 9502 CYLEX tests.
Material Non-Ideality
Most PBX formulations are composed of crystalline HE grains interspersed by binder such that
machined surface roughness is comparable to the
If detonation reaction is substantially
homogeneous as it is for PBX 9501 in conned scenarios 13 the grain size can exceed CJwhich
for 9501 it does by 4. Thus machined surface
roughness causes an OCJ RMS gap thickness.
In contrast insensitive PBX 9502 reacts quite
heterogeneously 16 meaning that reaction spreads
from the hottest regions to consume the interstitial
material. Because hot spot locations are tied to
the heterogeneous HE microstructure one argues
that CJ is unlikely to be sub-grain-scaleas indeed for the full 9502 reaction zone it is not. Consequently the surface roughnesses of well-machined
9502 parts should be much smaller than CJ.
If excellent conner contact were achieved hotspot criticality might be altered by a high thermal
conductivity conner. Like product-jet deadening
the effect would quench or retard reaction in an
HE edge layer the thickness of which would be
On13 where n is the supercritical hot spot number density and n13 is tied to the microstructure.
Experimental Details
The Detonation-Connement Sandwich Test
Consistent contact between solid HE and various conning materials metals plastics rubbers
is best achieved by a clamped sandwich assembly yet achieving and verifying! this
condition is nontrivial. Each layer must be made
quite at and parallel. Even then edge-clamped assemblies bow outward in the middle rather than applying pressure where it is most needed.
A common practice is to apply grease between
material layers to eliminate air gaps. This practice
is disallowed for wave connement tests. It is clear
by now and will be further demonstrated in 6 that
even thin material layers can alter HE connement
properties. Contact must be clean dry and uniform.
One may therefore ask why a grease layer is recommended in the CYLEX test. The reason is that
CYLEX is primarily a product connement test not
a wave connement test. Consequently the main
goal is to maintain product connement by preventing the tube wall from breaking prematurely.
Shock breakout is measured across the central
plane by the mirror destruction technique whereby
light from an Argon-bomb ash is reected from the
observation surface toward a streak camera 3. The
signature is initially bright and promptly attenuates
when the shock breaks through the surface. We exploit the fact that PBX 9502 can be polished to a
fair specular surface. The conning materials must
be polished to similar but distinct reectivities.
The DCST variant pictured in Fig. 7 involved
a signicant development effort.
It utilizes several specialized techniques including assembly xtures the discussion of which is beyond the scope of
this paper. The prototype DCST variant is summarized in 17. Engineering details plus a signicant
amount of additional data analysis and results are
given in an internal Los Alamos report 18.
Each shorting-pin x-t dataset was t to a leastsquares line the slope of which is the detonation
phase speed D0 and slope uncertainty of which
characterizes the error . Each shot has two such
sets. We quote the 2-weighted average value D0
and its corresponding composite error .
The streak-camera lm records were digitized by
optical comparator and the resulting detonationshape data sets were t with the equation
For bare PBX 9502 rate sticks up to three Eq. 1
terms are required to achieve an optimal t 3. For
slab geometry irrespective of connement a single term subsequently denoted as a1 sufces. The
quoted connement angle c is the t edge-angle
evaluated at the HE slab half-thickness X.
The shock-shape data sets were t with the form
where   x  X   y  Y  and Y  yX is
the detonation edge lag.
Whereas the HE observation-surface boundarycondition is supersonic cf. 1.2conner observation-surface boundary-conditions may be subsonic. Consequently the conner shock shapes
may be affected by the presence of the free surface
which may slightly distort their shape.
Our solution was to design a simple optimal
structure by pre-bowing the clamping plates in the
opposite direction so that the target pressure is
uniformly achieved when the clamping bolts are
torqued to the design value. This technique is part
of an overall solution it is not a panacea. Each layer
must still be made as at and parallel as practicable.
Our experiment called the Detonation Connement Sandwich Test DCST is pictured in Fig. 7.
The PBX 9502 main charge is 8-mm thick 151-mm
wide and 127-mm long. Initiation begins with an
RP-2 detonator which initiates a LANL Line Wave
Generator which initiates a CompB booster strip
8-mm square  151-mm long in two lengthwise
pieces which initiates the main charge. Lateral
wave curvature is negligible near the charge center.
Fig. 7. Photo of a Ta-conned DCST 8-1540.
For the nominal single-layer connement tests
the conning-layer thickness is 4 mm. Numerical
simulations conrm that this thickness is supercritical i.e. it appears innite see 1.1 to the detonation. The observation end HE and Ta layers are
visible in the photograph as are two rows of shorting pins used to measure VOD.
Results for Single Connement Layers
Figures 8 9 and 10 show DCST shock shapes for
the materials given in the 2 examples Ta strong
connement Sy weak connement and Al stiff
connement. The plotted traces are the ts to
Eqs. 1 and 2. The t residuals are O1 m for
the detonation ts and O10 m for the shock ts.
Each gure is plotted at the true aspect ratio.
Fig. 8. DCST data for strong Ta connement.
Fig. 9. DCST data for weak Sy connement.
Fig. 10. DCST data for stiff Al connement.
The three cases exhibit various degrees of conner-shock curvature which the Eq. 2 form accommodates. The stiff Al case looks unremarkable at this
resolution there is no sign of anomalous behavior.
Table 1 lists results for the three single-layer
DCST tests. The top block gives general shot information the second block gives pre-shot parameters
where  is the average conner thickness and 0 is
the PBX 9502 immersion density the third block
gives measured detonation quantities where 0 is
the centerline wave curvature the bottom block
gives measured conner-shock quantities where c
is the shock angle at the interface measured like c
from a charge cross section.
Table 1. Single-Layer DCST Test Results PBX
9502 Lot HOL88H891-008 Shot Temp. 221C
 CP  Commercially Pure AW  As Wrought
For the weak Sy connement case c  35 in
agreement with our previous sonic-angle estimates
see 1.2. Thus Sy imposes zero connement as
predicted by shock polar theory. For the stiff Al
case c  12 indicating that the charge feels some
connement. For the strong Ta case c  9.5
indicating that the charge feels more connement.
The ordering of the three other detonation metrics  D0 Y  0 is qualitatively consistent with c
i.e. the wave becomes faster and atter as c decreases. The question remains how quantitatively
consistent is the measured behavior with shock polar theory? The weak Sy case is fully consistent
and the stiff Al case is macroscopically inconsistent. What about the strong Ta case?
The following gure-of-merit works with all four
detonation metrics c D0 Y  0 and indicates
the realized fraction of the theoretical connement
cid12cid12cid12cid12 im  iu
cid12cid12cid12cid12
where i represents any metric and the subscripts
denote the following u unconned m measured conned and t theoretical conned.
The results are listed in Table 2 which shows that
the detonation realized between 63 and 89 of
theoretical connement depending on the metric.
As suggested by Fig. 3 VOD is the least responsive parameter to connement the other three are
in reasonable agreement with shock polar theory.
Table 2. Fraction of Theoretical Connement Attained by Strong Ta Connement Four Metrics
FOMc FOM D0 FOMY  FOM0
Results for Double Connement-Layers
Next we consider two scenarios where a thin material layer that by itself offers no connement Sy is
backed by a thick material layer that by itself does
offer connement Ta or Al. The Ta and Al layer
thicknesses see 5 remain at 4 mm.
If the Sy layer is thicker than its critical value
then detonation will propagate unconned as if the
Sy layer were innite. The Ta Al or other backing layers still conne products according to their
composite areal masses. If the Sy layer is thinner
than its critical value then the detonation will experience connement that increases as the Sy layer
decreases. As the Sy layer thickness approaches
zero the connement effect approaches the respective backing-layer behaviors measured in 5.
Finally we consider a case of silicone foam SF
backed by 304L stainless steel SS. The nominal
SF thickness and density are 0.5 mm and 0.75 gcc
respectively. The main issue for the SFSS case is
the same as for the SyTa and SyAl cases how
much connement is felt as the result of the stoodoff backing layer? Secondly will the foam suppress
the HE product jet? which would be quite prominent if the same gap thickness were just air.
Figures 11-13 plot DCST data for the SyTa
SyAl and SFSS cases. A Mach stem is observed
in each Sy layer which was also seen in numerical simulations and a similar proton-radiographydiagnosed test 19. No light reects from the SF
layer the dashed lines merely indicate causality.
Table 3 lists the results where  is the mean
compliant-layer thickness which can be simply
summarized all three -values are supercritical
such that all cases propagate as unconned. Moreover jetting is fully suppressed by the foam layer.
Fig. 11. DCST data for SyTa connement.
Fig. 12. DCST data for SyAl connement.
Fig. 13. DCST data for SFSS connement.
Table 3. Double-Layer DCST Test Results PBX
9502 Lot HOL88H891-008 Shot Temp. 221C
Detonation wave connement is a tricky business
for solid HEs and conners. Most nominally-conned assemblies operate in an ambiguous regime
such thatlike PBX 9502 CYLEX testslittle to
none of the nominal effect may be realized. In such
cases it is likely to vary from shot to shot and from
one location to the next in the same shot. While
nominal connement is estimable in some cases actual wave connement is impossible to calculate.
Workers should avoid ambiguous wave connement congurations when that aspect is concerning.
For example conned diameter-effect curves are ill
advised. One is better off obtaining the DSD intrinsic relation from bare front-curvature rate sticks
performing careful connement tests to obtain cvalues and calculating the result from them.
On the other hand various rubber and foam-lined
congurations which were previously assumed to
sense backing-layer connement actually propagate unconned. This previously unknown fact simplies the modeling of many scenarios. Air gaps
should be avoided due to jetting but we showed for
one specic case that a foam layer suppresses it.Sub-Detonative Response of a Potassium Chlorate-Sugar Mixture
Marcia A. Cooper and Adam W. Sapp
Explosives Technologies Group Sandia National Laboratories Albuquerque New Mexico USA 87185
Abstract. Planar impact experiments were conducted to study the sub-detonative responses
of a potassium-chlorate and sugar mixture. ORVIS was used as the diagnostic and data
is analyzed in the context of prior and similar studies of the shock response of granular
sugar. This test series presents the rst use of a dual-delay-leg ORVIS conguration in
multiple tests and the agreement between interferometers with different velocity spatial
and temporal scales is noted. Efforts to further exploit the data collected by the ORVIS
diagnostic are discussed in terms of the measured particle velocity uctuations in the postshock region. The data is analyzed in terms of the probability density function and power
New applications of spatially-resolved diagnostics are enhancing scientic understanding of the
sub-detonative response of porous energetic materials EM. It is well established that the mesostructure of heterogeneous explosives has a direct effect on the mechanical response to shock and detonation initiation sensitivity of the material1. For
non-ideal explosives that are characterized by an
extended region of energy release behind the leading shock front of a propagating detonation wave
the coupling between heat release due to mechanical work and chemical reaction is highly complex. Characterizing a shock propagating in these
non-ideal explosives is a rst step at understanding the role that the particles have on the materials mechanical response which ultimately provides a background understanding for the initiation
and sustainment of chemical reactions. Previous
data of porous EM response to shock has primarily been collected in single-component powder beds
or plastic bonded composite explosives in a manner such that spatial information is averaged over
the area of a focused laser spot2 or thin-lm sensing element3 4. In our work the Optically Recording Velocity Interferometer System ORVIS operated in line-imaging mode is coupled to gas gun
impact experiments with a binary explosive mixture of potassium chlorate KClO3 or KC and powdered sugar. KC-sugar mixtures have been shown to
detonate5. This binary mixture was studied as a direct extension of previous work on porous beds of
sugar6 7 with the additional parameter of chemical
reactivity. The ORVIS diagnostic collects spatiallyand temporally-resolved particle velocity data over
an area that is analyzed in terms of the shock propagation characteristics average shock velocities and
post-shock particle velocity variations of the KCsugar mixture.
Planar Impact Experiments
Planar impact experiments were carried out in the
single-stage gas gun at SNLs Explosive Compo
514
nents Facility. An illustration of the projectile and
target assembly appears in Fig. 1. A projectile tted
with a polychlorotriuoroethene Kel-F impactor
was launched through the 18-meter long 6.35-cm
diameter barrel with an impact velocity between
0.50 kms and 1.15 kms. The stationary target assembly consisted of a Kel-F target cup mounted in
a target ring that was xtured to the gun barrel exit.
The cavity of the target cup had a nominal diameter of 40.64 mm and depth of 29 mm. The stoichiometric KC-sugar powder mixture was pressed
into the target cup and conned with a 25.4-mmthick polymethyl methacrylate PMMA window.
A reector was installed at the interface between
the pressed powder bed and PMMA window forming the observation surface that reected the laser
light of the ORVIS diagnostic. Impact velocity and
tilt between the projectile and target were measured
with shorting pins mounted in the side wall of the
Fig. 1. Illustration of gas gun projectile and target
The stoichiometric KC-sugar mixture contained
25.9wt CH brand powdered sugar and 74.1wt
potassium chlorate. Potassium chlorate from Skylighter Corporation was sieved to remove particles greater than 710 m. Scanning electron microscope images of the KC and sugar particles appear in Fig. 2 indicating the presence of numerous
ne particles  10 m and fewer larger particles
 50  100 m for both materials.
The KC and sugar constituents were remotely
mixed at small scale 10 grams using a mechanical mixer that would roll a Velostat drum at a
low speed for ten minutes. The mixture was then
pressed into the target cup to the desired density
Fig. 2. Scanning electron microscope images of the
sieved KC top and powdered sugar bottom particles. Scale bars correspond to 50 m.
of nominally 1.53 gcc and a pressed powder bed
thickness of 4 mm. Based on a solid density of
2.143 gcc the test samples had nominal solid volume fractions of nominally 0.71. The test mixture
was sealed within the target cup by the addition of
the reector and PMMA window. Details of the reector are discussed in the next section.
A total of eight experiments were conducted
varying impact velocity. Table 1 lists the test parameters related to the target assembly and gun operation.
The ORVIS diagnostic operating in line-imaging
mode was coupled to the KC-sugar target such that
it recorded motion of the target reector at the interface between the KC-sugar powder bed and the
Table 1. List of Tests Impact and Sample Conditions. Impact velocity UI tilt between impact surfaces of projectile and target cup  initial density
of pressed powder bed 0 solid volume fraction
Optics for Line Illumination
PMMA window. The optical arrangement is illustrated in Fig. 3. The ORVIS diagnostic consists of
a single Coherent Verdi V5 laser 532 nm wavelength and line-shaping optics to illuminate the target with a laser light sheet. The reected laser light
is turned with a polarizing beam splitter and collected PBS and L1 of Fig. 3 and magnied by
two sets of optics L2 and L3 of Fig. 3 and directed
into a Michelson interferometer. The interferometer
splits the light temporally delays one of the light
paths and then recombines the light at the image
plane R1 of Fig. 3 of a streak camera. The temporal delay affects the velocity sensitivity of the interferometer as noted by the velocity-per-fringe VPF
parameter. The camera then optically records the
resulting interference fringe pattern which is subsequently post-processed into particle velocities of
the moving reector surface as a function of time
and spatial position on the target.
In this test series a 5050 beamsplitter 5050 BS
of Fig. 3 was positioned after the rst collection
optic L1 to split the light equally into two interferometers. Thus the two interferometers were setup
to have different VPF parameters different magnication based on two sets of L2 and L3 and different temporal resolution based on the streak rate of
the corresponding camera. In effect the dual-delayleg ORVIS enabled determination of the measured
particle velocities in the case of fringe jump ambiguities. Test parameters associated with interferometer 1 include 1 VPF  0.279 kmsfr 2 fringe
Fig. 3. Experimental arrangement of dual-delay-leg
ORVIS coupled to the gas gun.
frequency of 50 pixelscycle 3 spatial scale nominally 135 pixelsmm on target 4 full image size
of 1344 H x 1024 W pixels 5 temporal resolution
nominally 101 pixelss for a 10-s streak time or
198 pixelss for a 5-s streak time. Test parameters associated with interferometer 2 include 1
VPF  0.206 kmsfr for tests 1-5 or VPF  0.359
kmsfr for tests 6-8 2 fringe frequency of nominally 60 pixelscycle 3 spatial scale nominally 250
pixelsmm on target 4 full image size of 2084 H
x 2084 W pixels 5 temporal resolution nominally
404 pixelss for a 5-s streak time.
In the context of these reported spatial temporal
and velocity sensitivities it is important to consider
the impact of the reector. Ideally an innitely thin
reector would be located on the exposed surface
of the pressed powder bed.
idealized reector is unable to maintain its reective characteristics against shocked heterogeneous
EM resulting in a loss of reected laser light and
insufcient intensity counts at the camera pixels8.
To overcome this problem a buffer material is often employed. In these tests a 0.23-mm-thick layer
of Kapton served as a buffer separating the reector from the test material. The reector was created
through the vapor deposition of a 0.1-m-thick adhesion layer of titanium followed by a 0.5-m-thick
layer of aluminum. Previous optical prolometer measurements of a reector created from Kapton plated with 35-m-thick aluminum layer found
the average surface roughness to be approximately
30 nm with a three-dimensional RMS roughness of
approximately 43 nm8. Thus the surface roughness
of the reecting layer is several orders of magnitude
smaller than the particle scale and the nite thickness of the buffer provides more disruption to the
spatial features of the transmitted waves than the
presence of the reector. The challenge of maintaining an adequate interference fringe pattern that
is within the nite camera sensitivity throughout the
recording time is an ongoing challenge in ORVIS
experimentation with heterogeneous EM.
The raw fringe records collected from each interferometer were analyzed with the rolling quadrature method9 10.
In this method the phase relationship of line outs at 0 90 180 and 270 degree
positions through a single fringe are maintained. By
collecting these phase-related line outs at each pixel
shift the entire image is used to generate the velocity surface. This method is a variation of the previously established methodology that considered only
the 14 fringe line outs 9 10. Resolving fringe jumps
then necessitates an automated method when processing 1000 or more velocity proles. We have implemented a scheme to create an image of pseudobeam-intensity that is used to search for pixels of
contrast loss based on a relative deviation from the
baseline zero motion contrast values. This scheme
identies points of contrast loss that denote fringe
ORVIS fringe records from both interferometers
were captured for all tests of Table 1 except test
numbers 1 and 3 in which the camera on interferometer 2 was triggered too early. The images from the
two interferometers for test 5 appear in Fig. 4. In the
presentation of all raw images time increases along
the horizontal direction from left to right and spatial distance of the target varies along the vertical
Several main features observed in the images of
Fig. 4 also appeared consistently in the other test
series fringe records. Namely the fringes remain
constant until the arrival of the plastic shock. Previous data6 of granular sugar impacts observed a
signicant elastic precursor region that is not observed in this data at similar impact velocities. This
is likely due to the presence of ne sugar particles
Fig. 4. Representative ORVIS records for interferometer 1 left and interferometer 2 right from test
5 at an impact velocity of 1.026 kms.
that homogenizes the mechanical mixture response.
A distinct discontinuity in the fringes indicates the
arrival of the transmitted shock wave at the reector interface. This discontinuity varies slightly in
its arrival time due to imperfections in tilt between
the impact faces of the projectile and target cup
small variations in local pressed bed density or imperfections in the mating surfaces of the target assembly. The post-shock region contains variations
in intensity that are superimposed over the nominal
fringe intensity variations. It is these variations in
this plateau region that is the primary focus of the
analysis in the next section.
Due to slight differences in the arrival time of
the plastic shock within the streak camera recording time the raw images were cropped to view the
same time duration relative to the propagation time
through the powder bed. In the left image of Fig. 4
the relief wave from the side wall moves inwards
towards the center of the test sample. The images
were cropped to 70 of the time between the arrival
of the initial wave and the centerline convergence of
this relief wave. This time duration varied with impact velocity and ranged between 1.9 and 2.9 s.
The image height spatial dimension was cropped
to be consistent across datasets. For interferometer 1 the images were cropped to approximately 7
mm distance on the target whereas the data of interferometer 2 was cropped to nominally 3.5 mm on
For each raw fringe record the pixel intensities
were converted into particle velocities and plotted
as a function of position and time. This is illustrated
for the image data of interferometer 1 Fig. 4 in
Fig. 5. Here the undisturbed initial state is followed
by the arrival of the non-dispersive shock that is followed by a post-shock region with velocity variations about a mean value. This test condition was
largely non-reactive with some indications of slight
Fig. 5. Particle velocities as a function of position
and time calculated from the raw fringe record of
interferometer 1 left image of Fig. 4.
While not shown a similar surface map of particle velocities as a function of position and time
was also calculated from the raw fringe record of the
second interferometer right image of Fig. 4 allowing for the obvious comparisons between interferometers. Figure 6 compares the spatially-averaged
velocities and the spatially-averaged standard deviations in velocity as a function of time. The strong
agreement in post-shock velocities between the two
interferometers is displayed along with differences
in the temporal sensitivities of the two cameras.
The slight differences in the shock front in both
the mean and standard deviation are a function of
temporal resolution slight variations in wave arrival
across the image and fringe jump placement.
The particle velocities calculated from all tests of
Table 1 are plotted together in Fig. 7 in terms of
the spatially-averaged velocity histories. Multiple
overlapping lines correspond to the multiple interferometers and repeat tests at a given impact ve
Fig. 6. Comparison of the spatially-averaged velocity top and spatially-averaged standard deviation
of velocity bottom with time for the raw fringe
locity condition. It is seen in the proles that tests
with impact velocities less than 0.85 kms are unreactive slight chemical reaction is observed behind the shock front at impact velocities of 0.85 and
1.02 kms and signicant chemical reaction is observed at the highest impact velocity condition of
1.15 kms. Test 7 at the highest impact velocity
shows evidence of chemical reaction at the shock
Fig. 7. Spatially averaged particle velocity histories
plotted as a function of time for interferometer 1 of
the tests in Table 1. The data from interferometer 2
plotted for tests 2 4 and 6 of Table 1
front followed by a relaxation with corresponding
decrease in particle velocity. The raw fringe record
and surface map of particle velocities for test 7 appears in Fig. 8. The fact that the tests of Fig. 7
contain bed responses from unreacted shock to the
onset of chemical reaction affords an opportunity
towards a greater analysis of the particle velocity
variations observed in the post-shock or plateau
Analysis of Post-Shock Region
The use of the ORVIS diagnostic is considered
advantageous due to the ability to collect spatially
and temporally resolved particle velocity data. This
is explored in more detail using the data from this
test series to attempt a better characterization of the
particle velocity signatures that may exist in the
post-shock region of a heterogeneous EM.
To begin a single-point characterization consisting of the mean and standard deviation of the
post-shock region was calculated by averaging the
values across position as was shown previously
in Fig. 6 and also averaging across time. This
method provides a simple characterization yet obviously minimizes the full usefulness of collecting
Fig. 8. Representative raw ORVIS fringe record
for interferometer 1 top and corresponding particle velocity surface bottom for test number 7 at an
impact velocity of 1.15 kms.
two-dimensional ORVIS data. Nonetheless this
characterization does enable a direct comparison to
prior literature6 10 on the shock behavior of granular sugar at the same bulk densities and overlapping
impact velocity conditions as plotted in Fig. 9. The
average plateau velocities top plot of Fig. 9 show
strong agreement at overlapping impact velocities
and the increased particle velocity associated with
the reacting KC-sugar test UI  1.15 kms is apparent.
An interesting trend observed in the sugar tests of
Trott et al.6 was a decrease in the normalized standard deviation of particle velocity with increasing
impact velocity. The same trend was observed with
these KC-sugar tests although at a larger magnitude
bottom plot of Fig. 9. The larger magnitude of observed velocity variations could be attributed to the
bimodal material response and the image magnication or fringe frequency as compared with the
particle sizes. In the granular sugar tests the nominal spatial resolution of the ORVIS diagnostic was
633 pixelsmm on target which corresponded to a
total distance on target of approximately 1.5 mm as
compared to distances of 3.5 and 7 mm on target for
these KC-sugar tests.
While the post-shock region does uctuate about
a mean value the ORVIS diagnostic affords an assessment of the distribution of velocities about the
calculated mean. This is best displayed in terms
of a probability distribution function PDF which
has been previously applied towards the mesoscale
modeling11 of shocks in heterogeneous EM. Figure 10 plots the distribution of velocities for both interferometers using the data of test 2. The grey bars
plot the histogram distribution of the post-shock velocities for all times and positions. The black line
models the data using a Burr Type XII distribution
that ts a scale parameter  and two shape parameters c and k. A normal distribution was found
to not have good agreement with the measured distribution of velocities. As before the different velocity spatial and temporal sensitivities of each interferometer manifests in slightly different PDF values at a given particle velocity yet the basic shape
of the PDF functions are consistent. For this KCsugar mixture consisting of ne particles that are
several orders of magnitude smaller than the basic spatial resolution e.g. pixelsmm the velocities appear homogenized in their distributions. It
would interesting to expand this study over a range
of spatial temporal and velocity resolutions to identify the conditions at which a non-uniform velocity
distribution is observed. The challenge of selecting interferometer settings to best resolve the postshock particle-level uctuations is a noted challenge
in coupling the ORVIS diagnostic to the study of
Figure 11 evaluates the PDF of the measured velocity distributions as a function of time behind the
shock. Pixels corresponding to a time duration of
25-50 ns were analyzed to calculate the corresponding PDF of velocity uctuations collected from in
Fig. 9. Comparison of the top spatially- and
temporally-averaged plateau velocity and bottom normalized spatially- and temporally-averaged
standard deviation of plateau velocity as a function
of impact velocity. Granular sugar data6 collected
with VISAR and ORVIS diagnostics included for
terferometer 1. These snapshots in time are plotted together in the PDF-velocity-time plots where
the time axis corresponds to the time from impact
e.g. x-axis of Fig. 7.
In general the velocity
distributions shown in Fig. 10 are maintained in
Fig. 10. Probability density functions for interferometer 1 left and interferometer 2 right of test
2. Grey bars plot the distributions of the post-shock
velocities for all times and positions. The black line
is a t Location-Scale distribution tted to the measured velocities.
time for the KC-sugar tests. No signicant deviations in the velocity distributions were observed for
the tests where chemical reaction behind the shock
was observed. This may be due to 1 the associated velocity temporal and spatial sensitivities of
the ORVIS diagnostic may not be properly tuned
to scales needed to resolve uctuations indicative
of chemical reaction 2 the dampening of uctuations at the buffer-reector interface which is being measured 3 the homogenization that occurs
through propagation of the nite thickness powder
bed. Nonetheless this PDF formalism has the ability to contribute towards the inclusion of stochastic
heterogeneous behavior in continuum level computations of heterogeneous EM11. The common ability of the ORVIS diagnostic to generate measured
PDFs of velocity state albeit at a surface or interface that could be compared to calculated PDFs
from mesoscale simulations is an area conducive
to continued renement in both models and experiments.
A complimentary assessment of the spatial and
temporal uctuations observed in the ORVIS data
follows the ideas of electromagnetic scattering from
rough surfaces12 and kinetic energy spectra in turbulent ow13. The discrete Fourier transform of N
measurements of velocity zn collected at regular
intervals  is used to estimate the power spectral
density PSD from the FFT periodogram Eq. 1.
The corresponding frequency component is then
fm  mN  . The PSD is calculated at each
spatial position   spixel and then averaged across all positions resulting in the top plot of
Fig. 12. Alternatively the PSD is calculated at each
Fig. 11. PDFs of velocities for tests 5 7 and 8
collected at nite time increments within the postshock region.
time   mmpixel and then averaged across all
times resulting in the bottom plot of Fig. 12.
cid2cid2cid2cid2cid2
cid2cid2cid2cid2cid2
The spectrum for tests 2 5 and 7 are shown in
Fig. 12 along with the analyzed images6 of granular sugar. Consistent with the PDF of the velocity uctuations a distinct spatial frequency exhib
521
ited by the data is not easily observed in excess
of the noise on the spectrum top plot of Fig. 12.
The increased PSD values for the KC-sugar data
at a spatial frequency of 0.087 mm corresponds to
a 14 fringe spacing and is a numerical artifact of
the image processing. This same processing artifact is observed in the sugar data with a peak value
at 63 1mm. Additional local peaks although difcult to justify based on the signal noise appear at
0.277 mm and 0.043 mm. The possibility of these
being attributed to a true spatial scale in the velocity uctuation data deserves further exploration
through changes in the ORVIS sensitivity settings.
For the bottom plot of Fig. 12 no signicant peak
temporal frequency is observed in the KC-sugar
data. For the sugar data a local peak is evident at
3.17 1s which loosely corresponds to a temporal
frequency 420 ns previously6 identied through
wavelet-based analysis. Two signicant peaks in the
PSD are observed at higher temporal frequencies of
between 6-8 ns. Due to this new approach in investigating the spectral signatures in such ORVIS data
additional investigation is needed.
Conclusions and Recommendations
An experimental test series has been conducted
with KC-sugar powder mixtures studying the material shock behavior over a range of impact velocities. Material responses spanning unreacted
shocks to shocks with signicant chemical reaction were observed with dual-delay-leg ORVIS and
the associated image records. The spatially- and
temporally-averaged particle velocity uctuations
in the post-shock region showed favorable agreement with prior data on granular sugar while conrming trends of decreasing velocity uctuations
with increasing impact velocity. Further analysis
of the uctuations in the post-shock region were
explored through probability density functions and
power spectral densities. The harvesting of additional information collected in the ORVIS records
is an area of ongoing research and collaboration between mesoscale modeling and diagnostic development.
Fig. 12. Comparison of PSD in terms of top spatial
frequency and bottom temporal frequency for tests
2 5 7 and sieved granular sugar6.
8. Cooper M. A. Optically Recording Velocity
Interferometer System ORVIS Congurations
and Impact of Target Surface Reectance Properties Applied Optics Vol. 53 pp. F21F30
9. Trott W. M. Castaneda J. N. OHare J. J.
Knudson M. D. Chhabildas L. C. Baer M. R.
and Asay J. R. Examination of the mesoscopic scale response of shock compressed heterogeneous materials using a line-imaging velocity interferometer pp. 647654 Fundamental Issues and Applications of Shock-Wave and
High-Strain-Rate Phenomena Elsevier Science
10. Trott W. M. Castaneda J. N. OHare J. J.
Baer M. R. Chhabildas L. C. Knudson
M. D. Davis J.-P. and Asay J. R. Dispersive
velocity measurements in heterogeneous materials Technical Report SAND2000-3082 Sandia National Laboratories Albuquerque New
Mexico USA December 2000.
11. Baer M. R. Mesoscale Modeling of Shocks
in Heterogenerous Reactive Materials chapter 8 pp. 321356 Shock Wave Science and
Technology Reference Library Vol. 2 Solids I
Springer-Verlag Berlin 2007.
12. Elson J. M. and Bennett J. M. Calculation
of the power spectral density from surface prole data Applied Optics Vol. 34 pp. 201208
13. Pope S. B. Turbulent ows Cambridge Uni
versity Press 2000.Cylinder Test Homothetic Experiments of TATB-based Composition 
Rmy Sorin Olivier Bozier Nathalie Cordier Nicolas Desbiens and Vincent Dubois 
F-91297 Arpajon FRANCE  
Abstract. In carbon rich explosive the time scale several microseconds of soot growth 
and  its  dependence  on  local  thermodynamic  conditions  may  produce  a  difference  of 
energy release during the expansion of detonation products of various size devices. We 
aim  at  testing  this  effect  on  TATB-based  explosive.  We  have  designed  homothetic 
cylinder  test  50  20  and  10mm  with  copper  and  aluminum  liners.  The  PDV  signal 
was recorded on opposite sides of the device and the average Gurney energy was drawn 
along with the volume variation for each cylinder. We show a discrepancy of projection 
energy  for  the  smaller  cylinders  compared  to  the  larger  ones.  This  lack  of  energy  is 
ascribed to the difference in the carbon properties cluster size carbon phase of the soot 
along  the  detonation  products.  This  complex  problem  is  approximated  by  an  empirical 
kinetic  evolution  of  the  carbon  phase  transition  in  the  detonation  products.  This  model 
permits  to  reproduce  the  behavior  energy  quenching  observed  but  need  further 
exploration to reproduce the measures on both liners. 
metric  diamond  particles  recovered  in  detonation 
soot3.  The  diamond  phase  is  produced  at  high 
pressure  and  temperature  in  the  reaction  zone 
around the CJ point. The reasons diamond phase 
is found in soot are i it is meta-stable at normal 
condition  and  ii  the  thermodynamic  equilibrium 
is  not  satisfied  along  the  isentropic  expansion 
otherwise only graphite phase should be found. So 
transformation in the soot. Because carbon phases 
have a difference in internal energy and in volume 
the  carbon  phase  and  the  size  of  the  cluster  may 
surrounding  gas  and  then  the  energy  that  can  be 
retrieved  during  the  expansion  of  the  detonation 
products.  Thus  a  difference  in  expansion  process 
may influence the energy released by the products. 
This phenomenon is believed to be part of the 
non-ideal  behavior  of  the  detonation  propagation 
the  energy  and  volume  of 
Carbon rich explosives such as TATB create a 
large amount of  soot in their  detonation products. 
The  soot  mainly  composed  of  carbon  clusters 
sequester a certain amount of the energy liberated 
by  the  heat  of  detonation  in  the  form  of  surface 
and  internal  energy  of  the  carbon  clusters1  the 
clusters  vary  in  size  structure  and  carbon  phase. 
time  scale  of  carbon  clustering2
compared  to  reaction  zone  processes  releases  a 
part  of  this  energy  into  the  surrounding  gas  far 
behind the detonation front. This process depends 
on  the  local  thermodynamic  conditions  in  the 
detonation  products  so  a  rapid  drop  in  these 
conditions may stop the cluster evolution and trap 
a part of the energy.  
The  effect  of  expansion  on  detonation 
products  is  revealed  by  the  observation  of  nano
524
available  during  the  expansion  of  the  detonation 
products. We also have modeled the quenching of 
the  energy  by  considering  the  evolution  of  the 
carbon  phase  from  diamond  to  graphite  during 
the isentropic expansion behind the detonation and 
by the estimation of its kinetic evolution  with the 
local  temperature.  The  results  of  this  empirical 
experimental values. 
then  be  compared  against 
Experimental set-up 
We  have  tested  six  experimental  set-ups  2x3 
homothetic  devices 
cf.  Figure  1.  Each 
experimental  set-up  is  composed  of  a  cylinder  of 
TATB-based  explosive  composition  diameter  
and  length  L  and  of  an  external  tube  width  w. 
The  detonation  is  ignited  via  a  V17  detonator 
reinforced  with  a  slice  of  25mm  of  a  booster 
explosive.    The  diameter  of  the  tubes  is  equal  to 
10 20 and 50mm and their length is within 12 to 
15  times  the  diameter  to  ensure  the  steady 
propagation  of  the  detonation.  The  width  of  the 
tube is chosen so that the ratio w is constant and 
equal  to  5.  The  introduction  of  the  explosive 
cylinder  into  the  metallic  tube  requires  letting  a 
gap  between  the  two  pieces.  This  gap  is  constant 
and  equal  to  0.2mm  in  each  set-up.  To  avoid  jet 
formation  between  the  cylinder  and  the  tube  the 
gap  is  filled  with  an  epoxy-based  pad.  Two 
different  tube  materials  were  used  copper  and 
aluminum  thus  the  mass  ratio  of  the  devices  is 
respectively  1  and  0.3.  The  machining  precision 
for the metal tube and explosive cylinder is 50m. 
celerity  for  TATB2.  Moreover  the  projection 
ability can be affected i.e. scaling down a device 
may lead to lower projection velocities than those 
expected  from  the  scaling.  One  simple  test  for 
the  projection  performance  of  an 
explosive is the cylinder test. This test consists in 
measuring the  velocity of projection of a  metallic 
liner  subjected  to  the  expansion  of  a  detonating 
solid  explosive.  It  was  shown  that  the  velocity 
attained  by  the  liner  depends  on  the  explosive 
material and mass on the liner mostly its mass 
openconfined slab cylindrical and spherical.  
The  Gurney  energy  represents  the  energy 
transferred  to  a  metallic  liner  regardless  of  the 
geometry  of  the  experiment  i.e.  the  explosive 
density or the mass projected. The general formula 
with U the wall velocity M the mass of the liner 
C  the  mass  of  the  explosive  and  n1  2  or  3 
respectively  for  slab  cylindrical  and  spherical 
approximationb that leads to its expression EGurney
is  representative  of  the  explosive.  A  parametric 
study4 with geometry mass ratio and dimensions 
on  the  Gurney  energy  showed  that  the  results  for 
different  diameters  16mm  and  25mm  are 
comparable in a same range of mass ratio. On the 
contrary if we observe a variation in the terminal
velocity and thus in the Gurney energy although 
the mass ratio is maintained it should be related to 
the  late  time  slow  release  in  energy  of  the 
detonation products.  
this  size  effect  on 
homothetic cylinders subjected to the detonation of 
a  TATB-based  explosive.  We  have  designed 
homothetic  cylinder 
metallic  liners  copper  the  classical  material  of 
cylinder  tests  and  aluminum  a  lighter  metal  to 
increase the expansion rate to check if the scale of 
the  device  induces  a  difference  on  the  energy 
a potential energy of the explosive before detonation is 
equal to the kinetic energies of the detonation product 
gases and metal liner after detonation and expansion 
b the gaseous explosion products remains uniformly 
dense during expansion 
Figure 1 Experimental set-up. 
The detonation speed was measured with two 
arrays of optical pins disposed on opposite side at 
the end of the tube. The projection velocity of the 
tube  subjected  to  the  expansion  of  the  detonation 
products was measured with four Pseudo Doppler 
Velocimetry  PDV  probes  two  pairs  of  them 
positioned on opposite side at half and two third of 
the tube length. The line of  view of the probes is 
inclined  with an angle of 7  or 10 depending on 
the material used for the confinement.  
Results and Analysis 
The  Figure  2  examples  four  experimental 
PDV signals recorded for an experimented device. 
We observe that depending on the probe position 
the PDV is not the same. For probes positioned on 
the  same  side  of  the  tube  the  signal  recorded  is 
similar and does not depend  on its position along 
the  tube  the  velocities  are  slightly  higher  for  the 
2L3 position but stays in the standard deviation of 
the measure. This observation indicates that from 
at  least  L2  the  detonation  wave  propagation  is 
stationary and the expansion field behind the wave 
does not vary with time.  
Figure 2 Examples of PDV probes signals. 
We  also  observe  on  the  Figure  2  that  the 
maximum velocity depends on the position of the 
probes  around  the  tube.  On  one  side  of  the  tube 
the  velocity  tends  to  1760    15ms  and  at  the 
opposite  side  the  measured  velocity  is  1930   
15ms.  Such  a  gap  was  not  expected  to  be 
observed on the same device. Moreover its value 
170ms i.e. 10 of the measured velocity was 
larger than the expected velocity drop due to size 
effect.  The  experimental  analysis  conducted  to 
explain this discrepancy led to show that the tube 
machining  precision  may  have  a  prime  effect  on 
the PDV measure for the smallest diameter. 
An  analysis  conducted  on  the  set-up  showed 
that the inner and outer surface of the tube may not 
share the same axis cf. Figure 3. This difference 
of axis non-coaxiality means that the thickness w 
may vary within  10 of the theoretical average 
width . This variation results in a local variation 
of  mass.  One  can  show  that  the  ratio  between 
which  is  the  ratio  observed  between  the  PDV3-4 
and PDV1-2 cf. Figure 2. This simple geometric 
consideration  explains  the  variation  of  projection 
Figure 3 Effect of axis difference for the inner and 
outer surface of the tube. 
By using these considerations we can correct 
the wall mass variation using the four PDV probes 
measurements  we  make  the  assumption  that  the 
ratio  of  the  width  variation  only  comes  from  the 
non-coaxially  of  the  inner  and  outer  side  of  the 
tube meaning that the  two opposite sides  will be 
subjected  respectively  to   and .  In  that 
case the kinetic energy of each side of the wall is 
the same and is expressed as 
So  from  the  velocity  measurements  we  can 
deduce  the  mass  variation  and  the  dimensional 
control  gives  the  average  width  of  each  tube.  We 
can  then  calculate  the  thickness  variation  that 
the  velocity  gap.  We  have 
calculated for every device the width variation and 
its impact on the projected mass. For each tube this 
variation  is  below  the  machining  precision.  We 
observed that the smaller the tube is the more the 
width  variation  impacts  the  projected  mass.  Thus 
the  projected  velocity  may  vary  from  10  to 
2  when  the  diameter  increases  from  10  to 
The  Figure  4  represents  the  scaled  Gurney 
energy  versus  the  scaled  displacement  of  the 
external  side  of  the  tube  R0  is  the  initial  radius 
for the six devices experimented in light grey the 
experimental points and in color the average value 
on  the  four  PDV  signals.  The  Gurney  energy  is 
scaled  with  the  ideal  Gurney  energy13  which  is 
calculated for an ideal explosive with a polytropic 
exponent  and detonation velocity DCJ as 
which reduces for 3 to 
For each tube the energy is calculated with the 
mass  deduced  from  the  precedent  analysis  then 
the  average  EGurneyEGideal  history  is  plotted  for 
each  homothetic  devices.  The  standard  deviation 
diameters.  In  fact  the  littlest  irregularities  on  the 
small  device  width  variation  of  the  tube  or  pad 
local  machining  variation  will  have  a  noticeable 
variation of axis and as we observe the square of 
UPDV we are increasing the scatter on the measure.  
The EGurney  from different  size tubes are only 
comparable  in  a  certain  MC  range4.  As  the 
homothetic  devices  share  the  same  MC  we  can 
compare the set-up with same liner between them. 
The  comparison  of  devices  with  copper  and 
aluminum liners is not ensured to be as relevant. 
local  velocity  projection  like 
The Figure 4 shows that the scaled energy of 
projection  depends  on  the  diameter  and  that  the 
wall  material  has  little  influence.  The  Table  1 
the  average  scaled  Gurney  energy 
calculated  for  the  six  experiments.  This  measure 
show that the energy transmitted to the liner drop 
of  nearly  12.5  when  the  diameter  varies  from 
50mm  to  10mm.  One  can  see  that  the  values 
found  for  copper  and  aluminum  liners  are  quite 
close with aluminum being a little below.  
Figure  4  Scaled  Gurney 
displacement for the copper and aluminum tubes 
Table  1  Scaled  Gurney  energy  at  VV010  and 
Then  we  notice  that  the  average  EGurney
depends on the scale of the experiments for each 
tube  material  the  energy  available  for  the  wall 
experiments.  We  deduce 
cylinder  the  higher  the  energy  in  the  detonation 
observable from the early stage of the wall motion 
much  before  the  first  wall  fractures  and  visible 
plumes.  This  indicates  that  the  difference  of 
velocity  does  not  come  from  the  early  rupture  of 
the  tube  and  the  following  leak  of  detonation 
the  Taylor-Zeldovich 
Behind  the  detonation  front  the  detonation 
expansion.  An  oblique  shock  analysis  shows  that 
the interaction with the liner creates a shock back 
in the products. The products are then shocked and 
the  thermodynamic  conditions  locally  increase 
until  the  products  undergo  the  lateral  expansion 
and the large drop associated.  
front which corresponds to the scaled time     
At a scaled distance along the axis behind the 
and  then  to  a  scaled  expansion  ratio  RR0  the 
ratio  of  the  detonation  product  subjected  to  the 
influence  of  the  liner  will  be  the  same  but  the 
duration  the  products  undergo  the  TZ  expansion 
and  are  shocked  will  increase  with  the  diameter. 
Then the time lapse for the products to stay at high 
thermodynamic  conditions 
diameter.  So  it  seems  that  the  larger  is  the 
diameter the longer the detonation products stay at 
high  pressure  and  temperature  the  higher  is  the 
velocity of the wall so the larger is the energy of 
the detonation products. 
We observe that a phenomenon takes place in 
the  detonation  products  with  a  slower  time  scale 
than the detonation process and that it can quench 
a  part  of  the  energy  normally  liberated  by  the 
detonation  wave.  A  plausible  candidate  for  this 
behavior is the condensed carbon phase evolution 
the  products  i.e.  clustering  process 
Even  if  the  comparison  between  liners  is 
questionable  due  to  the  difference  of  MC  the 
energy  loss  seems  higher  for  the  aluminum  tubes 
at each diameter. This behavior seems logical the 
strength  of  the  shock  due  to  wall  interaction  is 
weaker  for  the  aluminum.  Thus  the  temperatures 
aluminum liner and should lead to a higher energy 
loss as indicated by the lower EGurney. 
Models and simulation 
the  explosive  model  PZR5 
reproduce  the  TATB-based  explosive  behavior. 
This  model  is  based  on  the  wide-range  EOSrate 
model6. The reactive EOS is an ideal mixture of an 
unburnt  phase  which  reproduces  the  non-reactive 
hugoniot  and  a  burnt  phase  predicted  by  the 
CARTE thermochemical code78. The EOS for the 
detonation  products  uses  a  Mie-Grneisen  form 
whose  reference  curve  is  tabulated  along  the  CJ 
calibrated to reproduce both the run to detonation 
distance  and  the  celerity-curvature  law  via  the 
quasi-steady  1D  weakly  curved  detonation 
theory9.  This  model 
reproduce  the  behavior  of  detonation  front  in 
multiple situations.510  
transformation.  The 
The  CARTE  code  computes  the  equilibrium 
composition  of  chemical  species  by  minimization 
of the Gibbs free energy of a system of detonation 
products.  The  system  is  formed  of  a  fluid  phase 
and a condensed carbon phase. The fluid phase is 
mainly  composed  of  N2  CO2  and  H2O  and  the 
Gibbs  free  energy  of  the  phase  is  computed  with 
the  KLRR  method8.  The  condensed  carbon  phase 
is  made  of  nanoparticles  with  different  shapes 
sizes  and  environments  and  is  represented  by  a 
semi  empirical  multiphase  Ree-Van  Thiel  model 
see ref. 7 for further details. For the isentropic 
thermochemical  code 
calculates the ratio of each carbon phase diamond 
graphite  or  liquid.  These  three  phases  are  mixed 
with  the  assumption  that  the  system  is  constantly 
at  thermodynamic  equilibrium.  For  example  for 
TATB-based  compositions 
graphite  phase  of  carbon  are 
predominant at high and low pressure.  
considering the dkin by interpolation between the 
two closest fixed d EOS. This procedure allows a 
standard  deviation  smaller  than  0.005  between 
calculation  for  the  thermodynamic  parameters 
internal  energy  grneisen  coefficient  specific 
heat and temperature.  
the  non-respect  of 
their  evolution  with 
The  realistic  description  of  the  condensed 
phase along the isentropic transformation requires 
taking  into  account  the  size  and  properties  of 
carbon  aggregates  their  surface  interaction  with 
thermodynamic  conditions12.  However  the  main 
equilibrium is that a part of the energy liberated by 
the detonation is not released into the fluid phase. 
This  effect  can  be  simulated  by  considering  that 
the  carbon  produced  at  high  pressure  stays  in 
diamond phase when relaxed to low pressure. So 
transformation  rate  of  the  volumetric  fraction  of 
into  graphite  using  an 
empirical function of the local temperature 
2  we  have  modeled 
The evolution of the diamond phase decrease rate 
as  a  function  of  the  temperature  is  drawn  on  the 
Figure 5. One can see that when the temperature is 
lower  than  Tmax  the  rate  of  transformation  in 
graphite tends rapidly toward zero. So this kind of 
kinetic evolution is able to reproduce the freezing 
of the d evolution in the flow to a value different 
from  zero  which  corresponds  to  the  metastable 
the  diamond  phase  at  ambient 
In  order  to  take  into  account  the  variation  of 
the  detonation  products  partially 
composed  of  metastable  diamond  phase  carbon 
we have computed the CJ isentropic evolution for 
each  tenth  of  fixed  diamond  fraction  11  fixed d 
EOS  from  d1  to  0.  During  a  simulation  cycle 
the  diamond  fraction  is  calculated  via  the  kinetic 
equation  dkin  and  via  the  equilibrium  EOS 
deq.  If  dkin    deq  then  it  means  that  a  certain 
amount of the carbon stays in diamond phase the 
thermodynamic  conditions  were  not  maintained 
long  enough  to  ensure  the  equilibrium  and  the 
Figure  5  Reaction  rate  for  different  diamond 
The  Figure  6  shows  the  adiabatic  dynamic 
Crussard  curves  for  a  TATB-based  explosive  in 
the case of equilibrium and fixed diamond fraction 
d  hypothesis.  The  isentropic  expansion  will  not 
transmit  the  same  energy  if  the  process  of 
transformation  is  frozen  in  one  point  of  the  flow. 
We  notice  that  the  equilibrium  EOS  for  TATB 
matches the diamond phase curve d1.0 at high 
pressure the graphite phase curve d0.0 at low 
pressure and lies between them the rest of the time. 
Figure  6  Crussard  curves  for  equilibrium  EOS 
plain line and fixed d EOS dotted lines. 
waves encountered by the detonation products are 
sufficiently  delayed  to  obtain  the  thermodynamic 
equilibrium  of  most  of  the  products.  This  simple 
study  shows  that  we  should  observe  a  gap  higher 
than 100ms in the projection velocity between the 
50mm and 10mm cylinders.  
If  we  draw  the  evolution  of  d  behind  the 
detonation front cf. Figure 8 we can see that for 
the equilibrium EOS d rapidly falls to 0 even for 
the  10mm  tube.  On  the  opposite  the  kinetic 
model  permits  to  freeze  the  carbon  state  when 
the  detonation  products  are  subjected  to  rapid 
expansion  wave.  The  smaller  the  diameter  the 
larger the diamond phase fraction remains. 
Figure 8 Diamond phase fraction evolution on the 
axis of the cylinder for different diameters. 
Comparison with experiments 
To  simulate  the  different  devices  studied  we 
used the 2D eulerian code Hesione. The mesh grid 
chosen is fine enough to perform Direct Numerical 
Simulation 50 m but is refined for the smallest 
scale  i.e.  grid  of  20  m  at  10mm  for  a  better 
simulation  of  the  confinement.  We  have  tested 
both EOS models equilibrium and kinetic d EOS 
with the configuration of the experimental devices 
TATB-based  explosive  cylinder  epoxy  pad  and 
metallic  tube  experimental  dimensions  densities 
and  materials.  The  PDV  signal  was 
simulated  by  post  processing  lagragian  particles 
inserted  at  the  tube  edge  and  we  have  calculated 
the PDV velocity with cf. 14 
In  order  to  show  the  ability  of  our  model  to 
transcribe  the  size  effect  i.e.  the  lack  of  energy 
release for small devices compared to larger ones 
we have performed a rapid numerical study using 
the  models  presented  above  equilibrium  and 
kinetic  d  with  Detonation  Shock  Dynamics 
DSD calculation on a large  mesh  grid 100m. 
We  have  simulated  homothetic  devices  of 
explosive cylinders with copper confinement ratio 
w5.  The  tube  velocity  was  monitored  with 
lagrangian particles positioned at the external side 
To compare the history of projection between 
homothetic  cylinders  of  various  dimensions  we 
have  drawn  on  the  Figure  7  the  ratio  
versus  the  scaled  time  t  with  
equilibrium EOS there is no scale effect whatever 
the diameter is the energy transmitted to the tube 
is  the  same.  The  projected  velocity  tends  to  the 
limit calculated  with the help of the ideal Gurney 
velocity  for  high  explosive  
cf.  ref.  13  which  led  to  the  limit  velocity  as 
line at the top of the Figure 7. 
Figure  7  Effect  of  the  kinetic  d  EOS  on  the 
projection velocity of the tube. 
As  expected  for  the  kinetic  d  model  we 
observe a drop in terminal velocity for the smaller 
cylinders  U  becomes  lower  when  the  diameter 
decrease.  Moreover  as  the  cylinder  gets  larger 
the  velocity  tends  to  the  value  of  the  equilibrium 
EOS  indicating  that  in  this  case  the  expansion 
Figure 9 Comparison DNS lines - Experiment 
points for copper and aluminum liners. 
with  the probe angle D the detonation celerity 
rUr and zUz  the displacement and velocity  
respectively in the radial and axial direction and t 
the time from the peak t-tpeak. 
The  Figure  9  represents 
between  DNS  and  experiments  on  10mm 
20mm  and  50mm  tubes  for  the  two  different 
tube materials. For each tube we compare one side 
PDV measurement against the simulation with the 
corresponding  tube  width.  The  points  correspond 
equilibrium  model  and  the  dotted  line  to  the 
The  comparison  DNS    Experiment  confirms 
that  the  size  of  the  cylinder  induces  a  drop  of 
velocity  in  the  wall  projection.  In  each  case  the 
to  predict  projection 
velocities that are higher than those measured. As 
expected  the  experimental  measures  tend  to  the 
equilibrium model for the larger tube cf. Table 1. 
The kinetic EOS exhibits the same trend  with the 
The  kinetic  model  is  consistent  with  the  data 
obtained  from  the  copper  tubes.  The  first  speed 
jump is the same for both models and matches the 
measures.  This  behavior  is  normal  because  the 
time  elapsed  after  the  detonation  is  too  short  to 
have an impact on the EOS. The gap between the 
velocities  appears  at  the  second  jump  increasing 
with  time.  The  history  of  velocity  growth  is  well 
reproduced for the 50mm tubes. For 10mm and 
20mm  the  experimental  points  lie  between  the 
two  models  in  the  first  microsecond  then  they 
disagreement  we  obtain  a  good  match  on  the 
the  kinetic  ones.  Despite 
Nevertheless  the  results  on  the  aluminum 
tubes  are  not  so  close  the  kinetic  model  predicts 
projection velocities higher than measured i.e. our 
empirical model is not enough accurate. Indeed a 
simple  model  with  only  two  carbon  bulk  phases 
cant  reproduce  precisely  the  highly  unconfined 
configurations  which  exhibit  important  kinetic 
effect.  We  must  take  the  real  phases  of  nanocarbon  into  account  i.e.  the  size  and  type  nanodiamond nano-onion... of the carbon cluster.  
The  better  understanding  of  the  detonation 
products  energy  is  actually  in  progress  in  various 
teams.  Microscopic  calculations11  and  molecular 
dynamics12 are complementarily used to study the 
evolution  process  of  the  carbon  condensed  in  the 
detonation  products.  From  these  studies  we  can 
gain  the  necessary  information  to  correct  our 
empirical  model  and  have  a  better  representation 
of the slow chemistry evolution inside the products 
and of the late energy release associated. 
investigation to show the late energy release effect 
for  TATB  high  explosive.  Three  homothetic 
cylinder  tests  with  two  different  liners  were 
experimented.  The  wall  velocity  was  measured 
with  four  PDV  probes  on  each  cylinder.  The 
Gurney  energy  is  calculated  for  each  device 
considering the local mass projected and shows a 
decrease in energy transmitted to the liner for the
smallest devices when the largest tubes tend to the 
We propose an empirical  model to reproduce 
the energy quenching due to the difference of size 
of the device. It consists in the kinetic evolution of 
the  diamond  fraction  in  the  condensed  carbon 
phase  associated  to  fixed  d  EOS.  This  model 
experiments.  A  better  knowledge  on  the  carbon 
clustering  process  will  be  necessary  in  order  to 
progress  in  the  modeling  and  to  reproduce  more 
closely  the  experiments  especially  the  aluminum Detonation Velocity versus Charge Size for Cylindrical Rate Sticks and Slab Tests
The Geometric Scaling of IMX-104 Explosive
Samuel W. Vincent Scott I. Jackson Carlos Chiquete Mark Short
Shock and Detonation Physics Group
Weapons Experiments Division
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos New Mexico USA
Abstract. We report detonation size-effect data for IMX-104 a new insensitive explosive formulation composed of RDX NTO and DNAN. The size-effect data includes numerically predicted and experimentally measured diameter-effect curves
from cylindrical-geometry rate sticks and thickness-effect curves from slab tests.
These results are used to determine the geometric scale factor that relates explosive
performance in the cylindrical geometry to that of the slab geometry. A Detonation Shock Dynamics calibration curve is also provided for IMX-104 based on the
It has long been known that the detonation
phase velocity D0 of a condensed-phase explosive will decrease with increasing ow divergence in the detonation reaction zone 1. This divergence occurs when post-shock pressures exceed the yield stress of the explosive conner
and results in a radial ow component behind
the shock front Figure 1. The onset of radial
expansion ahead of the sonic locus induces curvature of the shock front. As the charge radius
R decreases the relative magnitude of the di
Approved for unlimited release LA-UR-14-24800
vergence becomes more signicant on the detonation resulting in a decreased D0. In cylindrical charges this velocity decrement with diameter is referred to as a high explosives diameter effect. In slab charges it is referred to as
the thickness effect. The combined diameterand thickness-effect curves are referred to here
Comparison of the scaling of the diameter
and thickness effect for condensed-phase explosive has recently been a topic of signicant
interest 3. Prior comparisons have been made
for homogenous liquid explosives 4 heterogenous solid explosives 5 emulsion explosives 67
and non-ideal blasting explosives 8.
idated their analytical effort 12 by measuring average RDT D values of 0.98 0.81 and
0.75 for PBX 9501 PBX 9502 and ANFO respectively. These results indicated that increasingly non-ideal detonations exhibited scale factors that increasingly deviated from unity.
In the present study we report the measured
scale factors for the new explosive formulation
IMX-104. Diameter- and thickness-effect data
for this material are presented. The results are
set in context to the existing scale factor data
from PBX 9501 PBX 9502 and ANFO.
IMX-104 Formulation and Prior Experiment
IMX-104 is an insensitive melt-castable explosive designed as a direct replacement to the
widely used more sensitive Composition B
explosive. Previously referred to as PAX-33
MOD IMX-104 was recently developed 15 by
ARDEC the U.S. Army Armament Research
Development and Engineering Center and is
composed of RDX NTO and DNAN. Sensitivity testing has shown this energetic material to
have output energy similar to that of Composition B but with much lower shock and friction
sensitivity. Eight cylindrical rate sticks were
previously elded to characterize the diameter
effect and Dn relation for IMX-104 13. Five
slab-geometry rate sticks were elded to measure the thickness effect in this study.
Figure 2 shows the the measured diameter effect on a plot of detonation velocity versus inverse charge radius. The black points
are from our prior measurements Ref. 13 and
more recent tests. The red points are from
ARDECs prior work 14. The curves are generated from Eyring-form 16 ts to different combinations of the cylindrical rate-stick data using
the diameter-effect measurements as discussed
Fig. 1. Divergence-induced detonation curvature from Ref. 2.
work 46 measured the critical scale factor dened as the ratio of the failure radius to failure thickness RcRc in cylindrical- and slabgeometry rate sticks respectively. More recent
studies 710 have also measured the steady propagation scale factor dened as the ratio of radius to thickness at identical detonation velocity RD0T D0.
Researchers have interpreted that curvaturebased detonation propagation theories such as
Detonation Shock Dynamics 11 DSD predict
that all scale factors should be unity 58 for
explosive propagation where there is a relationship between the normal detonation velocity Dn and the wavefront curvature . However most measured scale factors have not met
that expectation especially for less ideal explosives 489. This discrepancy has led some 89
to question the applicability of curvature-based
propagation theories to non-ideal detonation.
Recently Jackson and Short 12 used a geometric proof to analytically demonstrate that
the scale factor should not in general be unity.
They 12 also demonstrated that DSD was able to
properly predict the diameter effect thickness
effect and a scale factor that was not unity for
PBX 9502 cylindrical rate sticks and slab tests.
A subsequent experimental study 10 further val
535
Fig. 2. The diameter-effect curves for IMX-104. Black points are from Ref. 13. Red points are
The slab test geometry is an unconned variant of the detonation sandwich test 18 that generates a region of two-dimensional quasi-steady
ow for measurement of detonation velocity
and front shape. Figure 3 is an image of the
17.5-mm-thick slab test which consists of consists of a high-aspect-ratio rectangular-cuboid
main charge that was boosted by two pieces of
PBX 9501 and initiated by two detonation line
wave generators 1920.
Ionization probes located in the center of
the slab measure the detonation position versus
time relationship. As the detonation velocity is
steady at the core of this geometry the slope
of a linear t to the position-time data yields
the detonation velocity. Additional details pertaining to the design and operation of the test
are discussed in Ref. 10. Front shapes were
also measured using the mirror turning technique discussed in Ref. 21 and illumination
via an Argon ash 22.
Slab tests were performed at ve thicknesses
intended to compare well with the prior cylin
Fig. 3. The slab test geometry.
drical rate stick data when plotted in size-effect
space detonation velocity versus the inverse
charge radiusthickness. The dimensions of
each test resulting detonation velocity and
standard error are listed in Table 1.
Front Curvature Analysis
To obtain a representation of the shock front
shape in the shock height z versus radius r
Table 1. Slab test thickness t length L width w initial density 0 detonation velocity D0 and
Table 2. Log-form t parameters with tted edge angle.
The normal velocity Dn and the front curvature  can then be found from the curvature
where zcid2  dzdr zcid2cid2  d2zdr2 and  determines whether the underlying test geometry is
cylindrical   1 or slab   0. Use of a
twice continuously-differentiable C2 analytic
function for zr yields smooth values of the
rst and second derivatives zcid2r and zcid2cid2r
and avoids the signicant noise that would be
generated in the numerical differentiation of the
raw wave front data.
plane a digitized image of the front breakout
is produced and reduced according to magnication factors obtained from the axial detonation velocity and included ducial in the image. To determine a base representation of the
crucial normal velocity-curvature relation that
involves derivatives of the front experimental
front shapes were t using the form used discussed in Hill 23.
It is a series function form
based on the work of Bdzil 24
where r is the local radius and the parameters
Ai and  are tting constants such that 0   
1 and n  1 except for the smallest test 81850 T  9.99 mm where it was necessary to
use n  3 for tting the slab front shape data.
Fig. 4. The produced detonation front shapes
for the slab tests in circles. Additionally logform ts to the front shapes appear as lines.
Fig. 5. The variation of the normal detonation
velocity Dn vs. r produced from the log-form
ts to the front shapes.
The variation of the normal detonation velocity and total curvature  appear in Figures 5
and 6 for all the tests carried out in this series.
The circle and triangle symbols in these series
of plots represent the 90 and 99 extent of
each detonation front shape. These are parametrically plotted in Figure 7. The central three
front shapes overlapped very well when plotted
in Dn- space but the largest and smallest tests
signicantly diverged from the central core.
To calibrate an explosive for DSD a functional form for the Dn relation must be specied and its parameters systematically varied
to optimally t the available experimental data
within the calibration procedure. To quantify
the quality of a particular t a merit function must be dened that incorporates the error
in the DSD-calculated detonation velocity and
front shapes into a single metric. Here it is de
ned as
The merit function is structured into a size effect component and a front shape error component. The scaling factor between the two sets
of data is determined by w. In the calibrations
described below w  0.999 a value close to
1 since there are many more front point error
points than size effect velocity error. The optimized parameters or parameterization of the
Dn relation is obtained by numerically minimizing the dened multivariable merit function. With this choice the nal shock front error was 10 of the total merit function value.
The calibration procedure used here is based on
the approach of Bdzil et al. 25.
The specic functional form utilized in this
Fig. 6. The variation of the curvature  vs.
r produced from the log-form ts to the front
where the parameters i for i  1 ... 5 were
optimized in the minimization of the merit
function. The results are plotted in Dn  
space in Figure 8 and the parameters are listed
The comparison of this calibration in terms
of the thickness curve appears in Figure 9 and
the front shapes appear in Figure 10. The root
mean square RMS error for the thickness effect data was 32.9 ms but this is biased by the
difculty of matching the smallest test velocity point for T  9.99 mm. If one removes
that point from consideration the RMS error
becomes 17.2 ms. The RMS error across all
the front shape ts was 0.0638 mm.
Fig. 7. The experimental Dn- data resulting
from the log-form ts of the slab front shapes.
DSD calibration prediction of rate-stick
The series of slab tests shared a consistent bulk or initial density of 1.755  0.002
gcm3. As a result the slab-derived t produced
here did not incorporate density dependence in
any of the Dn functional form parameters.
However the rate-stick tests for this explosive
showed a large range of densities in the explosive segments for each test 13 and the average
densities were generally lower than the current
Low-density explosive generates less energy
release per unit volume and exhibits lower D0
values. These density-induced velocity variations can overwhelm the size-effect velocity
variations and must be corrected for when comparing experiments performed at varying densities. To leading order density correction is
achieved with a linear correction parameter 
D00  D0nom  1   0  nom .
Table 3. Optimized t parameters produced in
the calibration of the slab data.
Parameter  is determined from analysis of
the experimental measurements and was determined to be 0.802 from the slab test results.
Figure 11 compares the current calibration
prediction of the diameter effect data for a calculation at a nominal density nom of 1.755
gcm3 to a density-corrected set of the experimental rate-stick velocities using   0.802
to the slab density.
Geometric Scale Factor for IMX-104
The geometric scale factor RT D0 is plotted in Figure 12 for IMX-104 as computed from
the DSD calibration curve. The size effect
data indicates a steady detonation scale factor RT D0 of approximately 0.82 but that
varies with D0. This measurement is consistent with other explosive measurements 10 and
also with theory 12 as it lies below unity. As
mentioned previous measurements 10 indicated
average RDT D values of 0.98 0.81 and
0.75 for PBX 9501 PBX 9502 and ANFO respectively.
Five slab tests were performed with IMX104 explosive to measure the detonation velocity as a function of charge thickness. The resulting calibration data set consisting of thick
540
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40
Fig. 8. The experimental Dn- data of Figure 7
is compared to the calibrated Dn function
ness effect and slab front data has been used
to characterize the explosives Dn- propagation law necessary for the application of the
DSD methodology. In addition this propagation law was used to generate the corresponding diameter-effect curve. The slab-derived
DSD calculation of the diameter effect curve
showed some agreement for the larger tests in
that series with the previously obtained experimental diameter effect data corrected to account for the higher initial density seen in the
slab tests. When combined with prior cylindrical diameter-effect data 13 the slab thickness effect data shows a geometric scale factor
that is approximately 0.82 which is consistent
with prior measurements 10 for PBX 9501 PBX
9502 and ANFO in that it is below unity 12.Characterization of Performance and non-Ideality of Urea Nitrate 
Magnus Bergh Jonas Lundgren Isak Sommarstrm and Leif Adelw 
Division for Defence  Security Systems and Technology 
FOI  Swedish Defence Research Agency 
Abstract.  Performance  and  non-ideality  of  urea  nitrate  have  been  investigated 
experimentally. We have determined diameter dependent detonation velocity and JonesWilkins-Lee  equation  of  state  parameters  from  rate  stick  and  cylinder  test  experiments 
respectively.  Here  we  present  results  from  these  measurements  and  discuss  the 
applicability  of  conventional  methods  on  markedly 
low  performance  non-ideal 
explosives.  Furthermore  thermochemical  calculations  of  performance  are  compared  to 
experiment. We find that conventional methods can provide useful data on performance 
and  non-ideality  despite  a  primitive  preparation  process.  However  a  complete 
characterization of a homemade explosive should preferably also include measurements 
on charges with higher precision with respect to density.   
homemade  explosives  HME  typically  have  a 
lower reaction rate and lower density. This results 
in  a  long  reaction  zone  curved  detonation  front 
lower  diameter-dependent  detonation 
velocity.  Furthermore  measurements  on  HME 
larger  variations  and 
uncertainty  due  to  a  primitive  manufacturing 
process.  Thus  characterizing  HME  can  be  a 
conventional  high-performance  explosives  cannot 
always be routinely applied.      
the  methods  developed 
Urea nitrate UN has been studied previously 
both  experimentally  and 
theoretically.  The 
diameter  effect  of  UN  has  been  reported  by 
Sandstrom et al.1. Howard et al.2 showed that the 
non-ideal  behavior  of  UN  can  be  described  by 
coupling a thermochemical code to either a WoodKirwood model or a hydrocode ALE2D using a 
simple  pressure  dependent  rate-law.  Results  from 
rate  stick  experiments  cylinder  tests  and  hemispherical corner turning studies have been reported 
for pure ammonium nitrate and ammonium nitratebased formulations.3   
In this study we investigate performance  and 
non-ideality of UN through a rate stick study and 
cylinder test. The applicability of these methods is 
thermochemical calculations.  
Experimental set-up 
the  results  are  compared 
The  urea  nitrate  charges  were  synthesized 
packed  and  detonated  at  the  FOI  Grindsjn  test 
site. The charges were packed by hand for both the 
rate  stick  study  and  the  cylinder  test.  Figure  1 
shows  a  drawing  of  the  set-up  of  the  rate  stick 
cylinder. The charges were initiated using Comp B 
and  a  plane  wave  lens.  To  attain  a  steady  state 
detonation  the  front  propagates  200  mm  through 
the  UN  charge  before  the  measurement  begins. 
Ionization pins are positioned along the cylindrical 
PMMA casing and at the cylinder base to measure 
The  cylinder  test  was  performed  using  a 
copper cylinder with an inner diameter of 60 mm 
and  a  wall  thickness  of  6  mm.  The  charge  was 
initiated  using  the  same  procedure  as  in  the  rate 
stick  experiments.  The  expansion  was  measured 
using a Cordin rotating mirror camera model 116 
with  an  argon  flash  bomb  as  light  source.  The 
image  from  the  streak  camera  was  digitized  with 
an  optical  flatbed  scanner  in  transmission  mode. 
The  scanning  resolution  was  1600  dpi  giving  a 
temporal and spatial resolution of 3.97 ns and 41.5 
m  per  pixel  respectively.  The  radial  expansion 
was  estimated  from 
convolving  morphological  and  edge  detection 
operations.  Smoothing  of  edge  data  SavitzkyGolay  was  performed  prior  to  estimating  the 
radial expansion velocity. 
Fig. 1. Set-up for the rate-stick experiment.  
The  urea  nitrate  charges  for 
experiment  were  packed  by  hand  resulting  in 
average  densities  in  the  interval  0.68-0.78  gcm3 
for charge diameters of 100 mm 80 mm 58.4 mm 
40  mm  and  24  mm.  Densities  and  detonation 
velocities  along  with  standard  deviations  are 
presented  in  Table  1.  In  order  to  compare  the 
detonation  velocities  at  constant  density  0.69 
thermochemical software Cheetah 2.0 3 BKWC 
library.    Figure  2  shows  the  scaled  detonation 
function  of  charge  diameter. 
scaling  was  performed  using 
Fig. 2. Measured detonation velocities as function 
of  charge  diameter  red.  The  fit  green  dashed 
indicates a detonation velocity at infinite diameter 
A  linear  fit  of  detonation  velocity  versus  inverse 
diameter  yields  a  detonation  velocity  at  infinite 
diameter  D03.67  mms.  This  value  is  in  line 
with a previous investigation by Sandstrom et al.1 
where  D03.63  mms  was  reported  at  the  same 
density and similar casing as in the present study. 
In  each  cylinder  charge  the  detonation  velocity 
was  measured  at  5  different  positions.  The 
standard  deviation  is  larger  than  for  a  typical 
conventional  explosive  about  2-3  times.  One 
reason  for  this  could  be  due  to  variations  in  the 
density along the cylinder axis. In fact systematic 
variations  in  density  can  be  expected  since  the 
charges are sequentially filled and packed by hand. 
Figure  2  also  shows  a  fit  to  the  well-known 
relation  proposed  by  Campell  and  Engelke4.  This 
fit  yields  an  approximate  value  for  the  critical 
diameter of 8.5 mm which can be considered low 
for a low-density HME.    
Fig. 3.  Characterization of the detonation front red cross in urea nitrate charges for the diameters 100 mm  
80 mm 58.4 mm and 40 mm. The data is fit to a quadratic curve dashed blue. 
Table 1.  Measured average density and detonation 
velocity  VOD  with  standard  deviation  for  the 
urea nitrate charges.  
positions  in  the  z-direction  was  calculated  from 
measured  times  of  arrival  and  the  measured 
detonation velocity of each cylinder. The radius of 
curvature  increases  with  increasing  diameter  as 
expected. The front is close to symmetrical around 
a  rotational  axis  parallel  to  the  direction  of 
propagation  which  is  somewhat  displaced  with 
respect to the cylindrical axis of the charge.  There 
are  also  some  variations  in  the  data  that  suggest 
symmetrical  front.  However  considering 
primitive  preparation  process  the  data  points  are 
described fairly well by the quadratic curve.  
In order to establish an accurate relation between 
detonation velocity cid1830 and front curvature  lower 
in  charge  density 
Figure 3 shows the measured curvature red of the 
detonation front for the charge diameters 100 mm 
80  mm  58.4 mm  and  40  mm.  The  dashed  blue 
curve  shows  a  quadratic  fit  to  the  data.  The 
approximate  relation  without  correction  for  the 
density variations yields 
 cid1830cid3404cid339859.9cid2018cid33973.9. 
A cylinder test was performed at a charge density 
of  0.902  gcm3.  From 
the  diameter  effect 
measurement  we  can  expect  that  the  detonation 
velocity  at  this  higher  density  and  substantially 
heavier confinement will be close to the detonation 
velocity  at  infinite  diameter.  When  measuring 
cylinder  wall  expansion  for  an  HME  there  are 
several factors that could complicate the procedure 
used for conventional explosives 
1.  The charge may contain significant variations 
in  density  which  lead  to  asymmetries  and 
perturbations in the detonation front as well as 
variations in the detonation velocity.  
2.  The  speed  of  sound  in  the  copper  casing  is 
close  to  or  above  the  expected  detonation 
3.  The  charge  may  be  initiated  using  a  booster 
that  has  a  significantly  higher  detonation 
velocity resulting in an overdriven detonation 
that  should  reach  steady  state  before  the 
measurement starts.  
4.  The charge should have a diameter that results 
in a detonation velocity approaching the value 
at infinite diameter.    
The detonation front was measured at the base of 
the  cylinder  and  shows  some  variations  but  no 
significant  asymmetry  with 
cylindrical axis. The average detonation velocity is 
4.36  mms  with  a  standard  deviation  of  0.090 
mms  which  is  well  above  the  sound  speed  of 
copper.  The  detonation  seems  to  have  reached 
steady  state  200  mm  down  the  cylinder  since  no 
clear  gradient  in  the  detonation  velocity  can  be 
distinguished.  It  is  however  noteworthy  that  the 
detonation arrived somewhat earlier than expected 
at  the  first  pin  indicating  that  the  detonation 
propagates  at  a  higher  velocity  for  quite  some 
time approaching the steady state conditions at the 
CJ-point relatively slowly. 
Fig.  4.  Results  from  cylinder  test  green  dashed 
and  hydrocode  simulation  red  solid  showing 
wall  expansion  velocity  as  function  of  time.  The 
rapid  expansion  blue  dotted  corresponds  to  a 
conventional explosive Comp B and is included 
Figure 4 shows expansion velocity of the cylinder 
wall as function of time. The green curve dashed 
shows  the  measured  velocity  and  the  red  curve 
solid is generated through hydrocode simulation 
using  Jones-Wilkins-Lee  JWL  equation  of  state 
parameters  calibrated  against  the  measurement. 
For comparison we include a typical cylinder wall 
response  for  a  conventional  explosive  comp  B 
blue  curve.  As  for  many  HME  urea  nitrate  in 
powder  form  has  a  considerably  lower  brisance 
in  a  relatively  slow  cylinder  wall 
expansion.  However  thermochemical  calculation 
suggests that the detonation velocity is comparable 
to  that  of  TNT  at  density  close  to  TMD  e.g. 
0.95 of crystal density.  
Fig.  5.  Hydrocode 
symmetry around Y-axis of shockwave dynamics 
during  cylinder  wall  expansion  of  Comp  B  left 
and  urea  nitrate  right.  The  expanding  casing  is 
outlined  in  grey.  Black  color  corresponds  to  the 
CJ-pressure of each explosive.   
the  measurement  exhibits 
variations  in  amplitude  and  frequency  with  more 
resemblance  to  noise  than  the  close  to  periodic 
oscillations  typical  for  expansion  velocity  data 
from  conventional  explosives.  We  believe  that 
variations  in  density  of  the  urea  nitrate  charge 
cause  variations  in detonation velocity  and  in  the 
detonation  front  which  in  turn  lead  to  seemingly 
random  variations  in  wall  expansion  velocity. 
Another  interesting  feature  is  that  the  simulated 
expansion  velocity  contains  no  oscillations.  In 
order  to  investigate  the  reason  for  the  absence  of 
resolution  hydrocode 
the  oscillations  high 
simulations  were  performed  using 
the  FOIdeveloped hydrocode GRALE2D5. We used JWL 
and  Mie-Gruneisen  equation  of  state  for  the 
explosive and copper casing respectively. Figure 5 
shows  axi-symmetrical  simulations  of  cylinder 
wall  expansion  of  Comp  B  left  and urea  nitrate 
right. Black color corresponds to the CJ-pressure 
of  each  explosive.  The  casing  is  outlined  in  grey 
and is located between 3.0 cm and 3.6 cm in the 
radial  position  X-axis  before  the  detonation 
arrives.  As  the  detonation  arrives  at  a  certain 
position  down  the  cylinder  a  shockwave  is 
transmitted into the copper casing. The direction of 
this  shock  depends  on  the  ratio  between  the 
detonation velocity and the speed of sound of the 
casing  material.  In  the  case  of  a  conventional 
explosive like Comp B the shockwave front in the 
casing is tilted with respect to the cylinder radius 
with  a  significant  component 
direction.  This  shock  is  subsequently  reflected 
back  and  forth  in  the  casing  Figure  5  left 
generating oscillations in the Comp B cid1874cid4666cid1872cid4667-curve 
monotonic  smooth cid1874cid4666cid1872cid4667-curve.  This  effect  has 
shown in Figure 4. In the case of the urea nitrate 
charge  the  shock  front  in  the  casing  is  almost 
parallel  to  the  detonation  front  with  a  negligible 
component  in  the  radial  direction  resulting  in  a 
been  explained  in  detail  by  Sharpe  et  al.6  using 
shock-polar analysis. 
Table 2.  Experimentally calibrated and calculated 
JWL  parameters  for  urea  nitrate  at  a  density  of 
Table  2  shows  experimentally  calibrated  and 
calculated  JWL  parameters  for  urea  nitrate  at  a 
density of 0.902 gcm3. In the calibration process 
the HI-Dyna2D code was used to find an optimal 
parameter  set  that  match  the  radial  displacement 
from the experiment. The detonation velocity was 
fixed to the measured value. JWL-parameters were 
also  calculated  using  the  thermochemical  code 
Fig.  6.  Set-up  for  hydrocode  simulation  of  metal 
plate  acceleration.  The  left  picture  shows  urea 
nitrate  yellow  light  behind  a  steel  plate  green 
dark.  The  right  picture  shows 
deformed plate after acceleration.   
In order to compare these parameter sets and find 
out  the  expected  accuracy  of  the  thermochemical 
calculation  a  simple  hydrocode  simulation  of 
metal  plate  acceleration  was  set  up  in  LS-Dyna7. 
The simulation was performed in Lagrange mode 
and  the  steel  plate  was  modelled  with  the  MieGruneisen equation of state and the Johnson-Cook 
material  model.  Figure  6  shows  urea  nitrate 
yellow light and steel green dark before left 
and  after  detonation  and  acceleration  right.  The 
final  plate  velocity  using  the  experimentally 
calibrated JWL parameters is compared with first 
the  velocity  given  by  the  calculated  JWL  and 
secondly  with  the  velocity  calculated  from  the 
Gurney energy. The Gurney energy was calculated 
from Cheetahs estimate of moles of gas produced 
average  molecular  weight  and  heat  of  detonation 
relation  given  by  Hardesty  and 
Cheetah JWL and calculated Gurney energy.  
significant  variations 
The  resulting  final  plate  velocities  are  shown  in 
table  3.    The  difference  between  the  velocities 
calculated  from  the  experimental  JWL  and  the 
calculated  JWL  is  about  12.  We  consider  this 
difference  small  since  urea  nitrate  is  a  non-ideal 
explosive  in  powder  form  with  low  performance 
calculated Gurney energy results in a deviation of 
17 in final velocity.        
Conventional  methods  for  characterization  of 
explosives have been applied to urea nitrate which 
can be categorized as a low-performance non-ideal 
explosive.  Cylindrical  charges  were  filled  with 
urea  nitrate  in  powder  form  and  packed by  hand 
in  density  between 
individual  charges  and  within  a  single  charge. 
Measurements  of  detonation  velocities  and 
detonation  front  curvature 
accuracy  which  can  be  expected  from  such  a 
primitive  preparation  process.  The  detonation 
velocity  at  infinite  diameter  at  a  density  of  0.69 
gcm3  has  been  determined  to  be  3.67  mms 
through  rate  stick  experiments.  Furthermore 
performance  has  been 
cylinder  test  and  Jones-Wilkins-Lee  equation  of 
state parameters have been determined at a density 
of 0.902 gcm3. A comparison to thermochemical 
calculation shows that performance is predicted to 
We  find  that  conventional  methods  can  provide 
useful  data  on  performance  and  non-ideality 
despite a primitive preparation process. However 
it  is  important  to  have  control  over  typical  HME 
features  such  as  large  variations  in  detonation 
velocity  as  well  as  asymmetries  and  perturbation 
of the detonation front. Finally a complete HME 
characterization  should  preferably  also  include 
measurements  on  charges  with  higher  precision 
with respect to density.      
This  work  was  supported  by  the  Swedish  Armed 
Forces.  The  authors  are  grateful 
Menning  and  Carl  Oscarsson  for  preparing  the 
urea  nitrate  and  to  Henric  stmark  and  Andreas 
Helte for helpful discussions.  On ignition burning and the transit to detonation 
Neil K. Bourne and Peter M. Dickson 
The School of Materials The University of Manchester 
Research Complex at Harwell Rutherford Appleton Laboratory 
Didcot Oxfordshire OX11 0FA United Kingdom. 
WX-6 Explosives Applications  Special Projects 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM USA. 
Abstract. Burn occurs at local hot spots in energetic materials and only pressure build up 
accelerating the reaction rate results in them becoming critical. Mechanical loading can 
localise deformation at a range of scales and in general a localised region can only exist at 
the  scale  beneath  that  at  which  the  continuum  load  is  applied.  However  within  the 
microscale  there  is  no  regime  beneath  at  which  localisation  can  occur  and  thus  since 
electrostatic bonding is strong mechanical and thermal phonons equilibrate states in that 
domain.  However  there  comes  a  compression  threshold beyond  which bond  strength is 
overcome and all flow is homogeneous regardless of scale. Thus hot spots are localised at 
the  mesoscale  and  as  pressure  builds  reaction  spreads  to  homogeneous  burn  at  the 
macroscale.  These  concepts  are  used  here  to  interpret  the  transit  from  deflagration  to 
detonation and the structure within the reaction zone in full detonation in what follows.  
Energetic  materials  occupy  environments  in 
which thermal and mechanical loads can impinge 
on  stores  of  the  explosive  in  a  variety  of  guises. 
Fragments propelled by adjacent accidental events 
may cause mechanical loads as the target deforms 
composition above an ignition threshold. In either 
case  the  impulse  supplied  causes  localisation 
within the material with local heating at a hot spot 
fluctuations  may  heat 
When  triggered  by  a  mechanical  impulse  a 
thermal  excursion  results  from  the  work  done  to 
raise the temperature above the ignition threshold. 
microstructure will favour a population of reacting 
ignition sites. In all such loading problems it is the 
statistical  nature  of  defects  and  second  phases 
within  real  solids  that  localise  flow  variables 
including temperature into a population of reacting 
sites  since  no  solid  explosives  will  be  found 
without  defects  in  structure  and  composition  in 
real  compositions.  Despite  these  considerations 
currently  used  theory  has  been  developed  where 
the heterogeneous explosive is generally regarded 
as a homogeneous continuum. Clearly liquid high 
explosives or gas mixtures such as hydrogen and 
oxygen are indeed so and even single crystals of 
various HEs may be so regarded as well. However 
whilst  these  represent  the  best  case  it  is  clearly 
successfully describe at least some of the observed 
features  of  reaction.  Thus  this  paper  will  explore 
in  which  defect  size  can  cause 
propagating  reaction  without  consideration  of  an 
inhomogeneous medium to describe ignition. 
to  apply  continuum  descriptions 
Scales for continuum deformation 
Understanding  of  burning  and  detonation 
developed  in  the  later  part  of  the  C19  with  the 
work  of  Vielle  and  Piobert1.  It  was  Chapman 
1899  and  Jouguet  1906  1917  who  developed 
the  first  theory  of  detonation  Zeldovich  1940 
von  Neumann  1942  and  Dring  1943  who 
developed the next significant improvement to the 
ChapmanJouguet  model  for  detonation  and 
finally  Bowden  and  Yoffe  after  the  second  war 
reprinted  in  1985  who  realised  the  effects  of 
localisation2-6. They classified concepts of ignition 
and  through  a  series  of  elegant  experiments 
developed  the  first  models  of  hot  spots  in  solids. 
Through  the  efforts  of  these  people  explosive 
science has prospered to the present day where the 
materials  are  used  in  engineering  as  precision 
sources  of  pressure  impulses  for  the  loading  of 
materials and structures. 
these  values  are  different 
in  demanding  environments 
requires  materials  capable  of  surviving  high 
mechanical  loads78.  Theoretical  prediction  of  the 
strength  of  matter  has  been  studied  for  the  last 
century and has at its core the determination of the 
energy needed to break a bond under a mechanical 
hydrodynamic  compression  and 
dynamic  shear9-11.  It  is  maximum  shear  strength 
that  controls  the  generation  propagation  and 
interaction  of  defects  under  load  and  the  time 
taken for a material to attain a steady stress state is 
the  deformation  mechanisms 
accessed  within  the  solid  as  it  slips12.  Chemical 
reaction  then  follows  as  bonds  are  broken  and 
kinetic  temperature  increases  with  work  done  at 
The mechanical impulses applied to a material 
span a range of rise times that define length scales 
containing  energetic  components.  For  most 
common situations the observer will be concerned 
with  stress  state  equilibration  at  the  macroscale 
within them. Each regime is a space consisting of 
subscales  that  are  a  nested  part  of  the  integrated 
volume  and  to  which  solid  mechanics  may  be 
applied to describe localization at the scale above. 
Strain is accommodated by slip within a region of 
lowered strength and in the limit this surface is a 
crack  with  free  surfaces  formed  as bonds fail.  At 
mesoscale a shear band or crack at the structural 
scale a failed joint. 
is  a  dislocation  at 
The  microscale  alone  contains  elements 
atoms that cannot be regarded as a continuum in 
which localization may occur at the scale beneath 
to  accommodate  strain.  However  the  mesoscale 
contains  grains  that  may  deform  by  slip  at 
dislocations or at fracture surfaces at length scales 
at  which  thermal  conduction  cannot  cool  the 
region  before  chemical  reaction  can  commence. 
These components are held together by joints that 
are  either  introduced  by  man  or  by  nature  at  the 
ambient.  Thus  a  structure  contains  components 
which are composed of grains and each of these is 
a  crystal  of  stacked  atoms.  Parts  at  one  scale 
localize  deformation  at  that  beneath  so  that  they 
may  deform  in  a  continuous  manner  and  these 
planes  of  deformation  are  defects  within  this 
subscale. The forces acting across each domain are 
gravitational and electrostatic but the propensity to 
that  gravitational  forces 
pair  charges  means 
the  component  scale.  The 
microscale  is  an  endpoint  in  this  pattern  since 
nuclear forces are so much stronger than all others 
that deformation here cannot occur by localisation 
at the one beneath Fig 1. 
the  components  contains  grains 
Fig  1.  Scales  in  condensed  matter.  A  structure  at 
the macroscale is composed of components jointed 
generally by man in some manner. A volume of 
respond  in  a  three-dimensional  way  to  any  load. 
This  scale  is  called  the  mesoscale.  Each  grain  is 
composed of atoms stacked in a particular manner 
that defines the microscale. The number of degrees 
of  freedom  increases  as  one  crosses  to  the  scale 
It  is  the  mechanical  nucleation  of  slip  that 
localizes deformation around a defect that converts 
work  there  into  temperature  rise  in  the  explosive 
from  which  ignition  may  result  and  burning 
proceeds.  There  are 
deformation of matter that operate over particular 
timescales in each of the domains described above. 
Localization in which flow surfaces are created by 
nucleation and deformation from available defects 
Flow  where  planes  of  material  slip  past  one 
another to allow the material to accommodate the 
applied  strain  and  Interaction  in  which  flow  is 
halted  or  arrested  by  the  meeting  of  slip  surfaces 
or by their termination at boundaries13. 
At each scale there are communication speeds 
response.  Whilst  mechanical 
information  is  carried  by  waves  and  temperature 
spread  by  conduction  at  the  microscale  acoustic 
and  thermal  phonons  equilibrate  pressure  and 
rapidly.  However  defect 
the  microscalemesoscale 
conduction  drops  dramatically  relative  to  the 
mechanical  wavespeed  in  the  solid  at  this  greater 
scale.  Thus  it  the  work  done  in  the  local  zones 
where nucleation of slip begins that heats material 
to form critical hot spots within energetic materials 
and  these  zones  are  at  the  mesoscale  where 
reaction commences in materials. 
Ignition  at  hot-spots  caused  by  mechanical 
Uniform  bulk  heating  of  an  explosive  may 
lead to ignition and flame propagation that spreads 
across  the  explosive  in  milliseconds  cook  off. 
Conversely  if  a  reactive  shock  wave  propagates 
through  a  confined  sample  it  may  detonate  in 
microseconds.  Of  course  there  are  transport  and 
densification  mechanisms  that  can  transit  one 
response to the other13. The contrasting responses 
are  due  to  the  different  loading  impulses  that  the 
explosive  is  subject  to  and  the  varying  boundary 
conditions for modes of deformation and chemical 
reaction mechanisms operating in the energetic. In 
all  cases  it  is  a  thermal  fluctuation  that  causes 
reaction  to  start  and  one  must  track  variations  in 
other state parameters that localise heat in confined 
zones. Once a local volume element is heated to a 
critical  threshold  temperature  for  a  requisite  time 
then  reaction  may  propagate  and  lead  to  a  stable 
burn.  This  local  volume  element  was  dubbed  the 
hot  spot6.  In  what  follows  the  start  of  chemical 
reaction that leads to burning or deflagration will 
be termed ignition whilst that which leads to the 
formation  of  a  steady  detonation  wave  will  be 
The  scale  of  the  reaction  site  has  critical 
influence  on  the  later  behaviour  in  the  flow. 
Defects  exist  at  the  microscale  nm  at  the 
mesoscale m and clearly also at the macroscale 
at  which  observation  is  made.  The  first  stages  of 
deposition  take  place  at  inhomogeneities  and 
burning spreads as a locus of local thermal ignition 
points which combine into a reaction zone as time 
progresses.  A  critical  hot  spot  is  one  expanding 
from  a  local  volume  and  at  a  temperature  just 
sufficient  to  cause  a  burn  to  propagate  against 
these dissipative effects. Bowden and Yoffe were 
in  on  a  suite  of  minimum 
requirements  pertinent 
to  most  explosives 
minimum  size  1  m  minimum  time  duration  10 
s  minimum  temperature  700K  and  these  have 
been  confirmed  in  the  years  since  by  various 
workers14.  These  physical  constraints  place  the 
critical  hot  spot  as  a  mesoscale  defect  since 
microscale.  This  confines  the  range  of  possible 
physical  mechanisms  that  could  be  ascribed  to  a 
critical hot spot and experiments have shown some 
to  propagate  and  some  not  to  occur  these  are 
summarised in Table 1. 
is  at  atomic  dimensions  at 
Dislocation pile ups 
Lattice thermal fluctuations 
 Table 1. Notional conditions for a critical hot spot 
in condensed-phase explosives6. 
Critical transition rates as function of pressure 
In  all  materials  the  amplitude  of  the  initial 
impulse  supplied  speeds 
process. To accommodate the strain slip must be 
initiated  at  an  increasing  number  of  defects  at 
higher  confining  pressures  until  eventually  it 
occurs  on  each  atomic  plane.  At  this  point  the 
shock  velocity  Us  becomes  equal  to  the  elastic 
wavespeed  in  the  material  cL.  Typically  this 
Hugoniot elastic limit of the material but this value 
varies from solid to solid Fig 2. It represents the 
point at which the defect density is saturated or the 
flow  becomes  hydrodynamic  and  this  transition 
stress  is  dubbed  the  weak  shock  limit  WSL 
131516.  When  these  conditions  occur  in  a 
the  boundary  condition  for 
homogeneous behaviour allows local burning with 
a  trade  between  energy  generation  and  thermal 
conduction  to  transit  to  more  violent  and  rapid 
chemistry.  The  WSL  in  HMX  can  be  estimated 
from  the  shear  modulus  which  has  been  reported 
for the cid31 and cid31 phases and in the latter is at ca. 2 
Fig  2.  The  weak  shock  limit  WSL.  The 
evolution  of  the  Lagrangian  stress  profiles  in 
elasto-plastic solids after shock loading. 
One  means  of  measuring  burn  rate  as  a 
function  of  pressure  directly  was  conducted  by 
Zaug et al.18. Two grain sizes a pressed pellet of 
crystals greater than 1 and less than 10 m average 
grain  size  were  compressed  in  Diamond  Anvil 
Cells DACs and ignited on one face by heating 
due to absorption in a carbon layer of the radiation 
from a laser pulse and with speed recorded by the 
appearance  of  the  burn  at  the  other.  The  results 
from this work are summarized in Figure 3 b and 
the  fine-grained.  Clearly 
show  several  features  of  note.  Firstly  there  is 
transition  to  higher  burning  rate  at  pressures 
greater than 10 GPa regardless of the grain size of 
the HE. Secondly there is a lower transition from 
slow  to  fast  burning  rate  in  the  coarse  grained 
samples  represent  a  small  number  of  single 
crystals in a target of order 50 m in depth. They 
will thus constitute a few grains in the coarse case 
but  more  in  the  fine.  Thus  the  available  surface 
areas for burning will be different in the two cases. 
The  dotted  line  shows  the  calculated  weak  shock 
limit  at  which  defects  saturate  as  compression 
increases  loading  down  the  easy  direction  in  the 
crystal. Above this value the coarse grained HMX 
deflagrates at higher speed. The fine-grained target 
accelerates to this higher value at a pressure a few 
times higher. This shows a pronounced increase in 
burning  rate  transiting  from  polycrystalline  to 
single crystal burn. An analogous effect occurs in 
metals  as  one  crosses  from  multigrain  to  single 
crystal behaviour at yield. Here the increased burn 
rate  corresponds  to  compaction  to  a  pressure 
beyond  which  defect  boundaries  have  any  affect. 
homogeneous  burn  within  the  HMX.  This  defect 
saturation  makes  combustion  through  the  grain 
possible  rather  than  the  surface  Vieille  burn 
discussed earlier. Indeed in these experiments the 
laser pulse energy required to ignite one face of the 
explosive  was  more 
compressed targets with higher burn rates than in 
the lower pressure targets with slower ones. Thus 
this  graphically  illustrates  the  transition  from 
hetero- to homogeneous burn in compacted HMX. 
When the burn accelerates to the detonation front 
speed the process is steady and the reactive shock 
that  starts  behind 
It  is  confinement  of  the  products  and  the 
pressure  build  up  accelerating  reaction  kinetics 
that  allows  DDT  to  occur.  In  the  case  of  SDT 
compression  establishes  a  pressure  sufficient  to 
drive the wave forward against releases from free 
surfaces. The transit from a purely inert shock to a 
steady  reactive  wave  is  an  unsteady  part  of  the 
flow that requires explanation for different systems 
interesting  variations 
conditions will correspond to the point at which a 
trade off between dynamic heating and cooling by 
conduction  will  occur.  Localization  of  flow  leads 
to heating that accompanies slip in shear or cavity 
collapse  in  compression  reaching  an  ignition 
threshold  to  start  burning  at  critical  hot  spots. 
Temperature rises occur in shock heating viscous 
flow  or  from  shear  localization  resulting  from 
friction  or  from  intrusion  for  instance  whilst 
determines onset of reaction in energetic materials. 
Fig 4.  Reaction  zone  in  the  detonation  wave. 
Burning sites behind an inert shock front showing 
progressive  and  regressive  burn  and  degree  of 
reaction  which  follow  the  forms  shown  with 
reaction complete at the CJ zone at the rear where 
the  flow  becomes  sonic.  Release  from  the  upper 
surface  quenches  reaction  and  the  shock  pressure 
drops in this region slowing the wave. 
This illustrates the development of critical hot 
spot  burn  at  the  mesoscale  with  acceleration  and 
transit  to  homogeneous  burn  at  the  macroscale. 
Pressure  increase  behind  the  front  transits  burn 
from  defect  dependent  plastic  deformation  and 
homogeneous  burn.  This  mirrors  the  localisation 
of  slip  down  more  and  more  hot  planes  until  the 
theoretical  shear  strength 
homogeneous  deformation  proceeds  above  the 
weak  shock  limit.  The  local  burning fronts  at  the 
mesoscale  accelerate  to  connect  the  onset  of 
reaction  to  the  reactive  shock  at  the  continuum 
Fig  4.  The  shock  front  is  homogeneous  with 
local reacting sites accelerating until homogeneous 
flow  occurs  at  the  CJ place.  Thus  the  pressure  at 
the  Von  Neumann  spike  is  the  stimulus  which 
Fig  3.  a.  Phase  diagram  for  the  principal  stable 
phases  of  HMX  in  the  low  pressure  burning 
regime    and  .  b.  Reaction  propagation  rate  in 
HMX  crystalline  presses  confined  within  a 
diamond  anvil  cell  after  18.  The  vertical  dotted 
line indicates the pressure at which an inert shock 
becomes  overdriven  in  HMX  the  Weak  Shock 
Discussion and conclusions 
If a local mass is heated at a faster rate than 
losses by conduction convection or radiation can 
dissipate  energy  then  the  temperature  will  rise  in 
that  volume  element  to  a  point  at  which  reaction 
thresholds  can  be  exceeded  and  ignition  occurs. 
The  stimulus  may  be  purely  thermal  but  more 
importantly  plastic  work  may  be  dissipated  in 
localized  flow  within  a  solid  that  may  cause 
heating  of  a  local  region.  In  all  cases  these 
drives  the  microstructure  into  the  state  in  which 
burn can be described homogeneously behind the 
front. To model such a process is a difficult task. 
The  whole  must  be  integrated  to  predict  critical 
conditions  for threats  in  storage  or  in  theatre  and 
submodels  must  address  individual  localisation 
mechanisms  and  feed  back  to  update  information 
at the burn front propagating in the continuum HE 
if progress is to be made. Effects of Confinement on Detonation Behavior of Vapor-Deposited 
Hexanitroazobenzene Films 
Robert Knepper Michael P. Marquez and Alexander S. Tappan 
Explosives Technologies Group 
Sandia National Laboratories Albuquerque NM 87185 
Abstract.  Confining  an  explosive  can  cause  substantial  changes  in  its  detonation 
behavior  but  the  amount  of  confinement  needed  and  the  magnitude  of  the  effect  on 
quantities such as detonation velocity and failure thickness are largely unknown. Physical 
vapor  deposition  is  used  to  fabricate  explosive  and  confinement  layers  with  pristine 
interfaces  using  HNAB  and  copperchromium  as  a  model  system.  Unconfined  HNAB 
films were able to detonate at thicknesses greater than 65 microns and had a velocity vs. 
thickness  profile  characteristic  of  homogeneous  explosives.  Very  little  copper  was 
needed to provide effectively infinite confinement as just 400 nm copper confinement 
reduced the failure thickness below 30 microns the same as for HNAB detonated with 
much  thicker  confinement  layers.  Using  these  data  we  have  been  able  to  bound  the 
reaction zone length of these HNAB films to between 0.7 and 1.2 microns and the time 
scale of the relevant reactions to less than 160 ps. 
It  is  well  known  that  confining  an  explosive 
with  a  high-density  inert  material  can  cause 
propagates.1-5 However the effects of confinement 
thickness  have  not  been  extensively  studied  and 
the  impact  on  quantities  such  as  detonation 
velocity and failure thickness is largely unknown. 
this  work  we  employ  vapor-deposited 
224466-hexanitroazobenzene  HNAB  and 
copperchromium  as  a  model  system  to  study  the 
effects  of  confinement  thickness  on  detonation 
behavior.  Both  the  HNAB  and  copperchromium 
confinement layers are vapor-deposited to promote 
intimate  contact  between 
the  explosive  and 
confinement  and  to  provide  precise  control  over 
both layer thicknesses and microstructure.  
Vapor-deposited  HNAB  films  have  a  unique 
microstructure  that  makes  them  particularly  wellsuited  for  these  experiments.6  The  films  initially 
form  a  dense  amorphous  structure  that  is  largely 
independent  of  substrate  material  or  small 
amorphous films subsequently crystallize at room 
temperature  over  a  period  of  several  weeks 
the  HNAB-II  polymorph. 
Following crystallization at room temperature the 
films  remain  quite  dense    99  TMD  but 
consistently  gain  a  well-dispersed  array  of  nanoscale  pores.  These  films  tend  to  be  very  smooth 
with  an  RMS  surface  roughness  of  a  few  tens  of 
nanometers  that  is  independent  of  film  thickness. 
This  low-roughness  surface  allows  for  a  pristine 
interface with an overlying confinement layer that 
confinement on detonation behavior. 
In this work confinement thickness is varied 
over nearly two orders of magnitude to determine 
the  minimum  necessary  to  behave  as  though  the 
confinement  was  effectively 
examine the effects of extremely thin confinement 
layers on detonation behavior. These experiments 
can  also  provide  insight  into  detonation  reaction 
kinetics by using the minimum effectively infinite 
confinement condition to give an indirect measure 
of the reaction zone length. 
Both  explosive  and  confinement  layers  were 
deposited  in  a  custom  designed  high-vacuum 
deposition  system  onto  1    3  cm  polycarbonate 
Makrolon  substrates.  Deposition  is  typically 
performed  at  a  base  pressure  of  about  1    10-6 
Torr.  Polycarbonate  was  chosen  as  the  substrate 
material  for  its  low  shock  impedance  so  that  the 
explosive  films  would  be  effectively  unconfined 
by the substrate. Polycarbonate also has a similar 
thermal  expansion  coefficient 
minimize  thermally-induced  stresses  in  the  film 
during  deposition.  Substrates  were  held  against  a 
cooled  copper  block 
temperature  around  room  temperature  or  below 
during  deposition.  The  substrates  were  rotated  at 
50  rpm  during  deposition  to  ensure  uniformity 
with  a  maximum  variation  of    5  across  each 
substrate  as  measured  using  a  Dektak  8  surface 
profiler  with  a  5  m  stylus.  Confined  samples 
were deposited in a copperHNABcopper stack.  
HNAB  films  were  deposited  at  a  nominal 
source-to-substrate  distance  of  10  mm  from  an 
effusion cell thermal deposition source which was 
loaded  with  powder  composed  of  the  HNAB-II 
polymorph.  The  effusion  cell  was  heated  to  a 
maximum  temperature  of  about  240C  until  the 
HNAB  completely  evaporated  typically  3060 
thickness  was  controlled  by 
altering  the  amount  of  powder  placed  into  the 
source and was varied from about 20200 microns. 
Shadow  masks  were  used  to  define  the  area  of 
deposition  into  two  1.6  mm  wide  lines  with  2.0 
mm wide pads at one end where the detonation is 
initiated. Line width was chosen so that the width 
was at least an order of magnitude larger than film 
thickness  to  minimize  edge  effects.  All  HNAB 
films  were  amorphous  as-deposited  but  were 
allowed  to  crystallize  at  ambient  conditions  prior 
to  testing  and  confined  films  were  crystallized 
prior to capping with copper.  
layers  about  50  nm 
Copper  films  were  deposited  in  the  same 
vacuum system using electron beam evaporation at 
a rate of about 0.4 nms. To improve adhesion thin 
deposited  along  interfaces  with  the  substrate  and 
explosive  using  thermal  evaporation.  Chromium 
was  chosen  as  it  is  a  well-known  adhesion  layer 
for copper and also has a similar shock impedance 
so  layering  chromium  and  copper  is  expected  to 
have  a  minimal  effect  on  confinement  behavior. 
Confinement  thicknesses  listed  in  the  Results 
section  are  the  sum  of  the  copper  and  chromium 
layer  thicknesses.  Chromium  was  generally  not 
used as the only confinement material except when 
very  thin    150  nm  layers  were  used  as  it  is 
known  to  develop  high  tensile  stresses  during 
deposition7 8 which could lead to difficulties with 
adhesion  in  thicker  layers.  Even  with  adhesionpromoting layers copper films thicker than a few 
presumably  due  to  deposition-related  stresses.  As 
such  detonation  testing  was  limited  to  samples 
with  confinement  thicknesses  of  2.5  microns  or 
Detonation Velocity Experiments 
performed  using  an  array  of  fiber  optics  to 
measure  detonation  velocity  similar 
described by Tappan et al.9 As in reference 9 we 
find  excellent  agreement  between  detonation 
velocities  measured  using  this  method  and  more 
traditional  methods  that  utilize  a  streak  camera. 
Substrates with deposited HNAB are assembled in 
an  aluminum  fixture.  Barco  Bond  MB-185  5minute epoxy Astro Chemical Company is used 
polycarbonate lid is assembled with seven optical 
fibers  for  each  deposited  line.  This  optical  fiber 
probe  lid  is  constructed  by  inserting  each  optical 
fiber  from  a  multiple-fiber  optical  fiber  probe 
Polymicro  Technologies  through  holes  lasermachined with a 3.50 mm spacing. A specialized 
fixture  is  used  to  position  the  optical  fibers 
orthogonal  to  the  lid  where  they  are  cleaved 
positioned flush with the lid and bonded in place 
using  epoxy.  The  optical 
terminated in a six-around-one fashion in an FC 
optical fiber connector for connection to a silicon 
photodetector  DET210  Thorlabs  with  rise  and 
fall  times  of  1  ns.  Detonation  is  initiated  using  a 
pentaerythritol  tetranitrate  PETN  structure  that 
provides an incident shock to the pads of the two 
HNAB  lines  simultaneously.  The  optical  fiber 
probes  are  used  to  detect  light  as  the  detonation 
reaches and destroys each optical fiber on the lid. 
No  distinction  between  chemiluminescence  from 
the reaction zone triboluminescence from shock 
sonoluminescence  from  shock  compression  of 
trapped  air  in  the  explosive  or  adhesive  is 
possible  and  is  unlikely  to  affect  detonation 
velocity  results.  Each  photodetector  is  connected 
to a digital oscilloscope with 20 ps resolution for 
data  acquisition.  These  fiber  probe  data  are  then 
used to generate position versus time data for the 
detonation front allowing the front velocity to be 
determined.  Each  data  point  represents  results 
from a single detonation test the vertical error bars 
indicate the uncertainty of the linear position-time 
fit from the fiber probe data while the horizontal 
error  bars  indicate  the  variation  in  film  thickness 
along the length of the line.  
HNAB  films  were  deposited  with  several 
discrete  confinement  thicknesses  to  quantify  the 
effects  of  confinement  on  the  detonation  velocity 
chromium were also tested. 
As  shown  in  Figure  1  at  thicknesses  greater 
than about 140 m unconfined HNAB films have 
a  detonation  velocity  of  approximately  7.44 
mms  which  is  slightly  higher  than  reported 
values  for  detonation  tests  involving  bulk  HNAB 
to  92  TMD.10  As  HNAB 
thickness decreases detonation velocity gradually 
decreases  as  well.  This  decrease  in  velocity 
becomes  somewhat  more  pronounced  as 
detonation is no longer able to propagate depicted 
by  the  open  circle.  Failure  occurs  between  the 
thinnest sample to propagate 67.2  0.6 m and 
the  thickest  sample  where  detonation  was  unable 
to  propagate  62.1    0.5  m.  The  midpoint 
between these two values 64.6 m is defined as 
the failure thickness tf. 
Fig.  1.  Plot  of  detonation  velocity  versus  HNAB 
thickness  for  unconfined  films.  The  open  circle 
represents the thickest films where detonation was 
unable to propagate.  
Confining  the  HNAB  films  with  very  small 
amounts of copper has a substantial effect on the 
detonation behavior as shown in Figure 2. While 
the  maximum  detonation  velocity  is  similar  to 
unconfined  films  detonation  is  able  to  propagate 
in  the  confined  films  at  much  smaller  explosive 
thicknesses. Where the unconfined films failed to 
propagate  with  film  thicknesses  below  about  65 
m films with sufficient copper confinement were 
able to detonate with explosive thicknesses of less 
than  30  m.  Somewhat 
appreciable difference  in HNAB  failure  thickness 
was  observed  with  changes 
thickness between 400 nm and 2.5 m. However 
for confinement thicknesses of 250 nm or less the 
confinement thickness decreased. Interestingly all 
confined  samples  show  less  change  in  detonation 
velocity  when  approaching  failure 
observed with the unconfined films. 
Fig.  2.  Plot  of  detonation  velocity  versus  HNAB 
films  confined  with  various 
thicknesses  of  copper  and  chromium.  The  data 
points on the axis represent the thickest films from 
each confinement condition where detonation was 
unable to propagate. 
Following  detonation 
substrates  are  not  destroyed  but  rather  retain  a 
dent  track  showing  the  path  of  the  detonation 
front. Interestingly samples that were approaching 
tf but where detonation was still able to propagate 
occasionally  show  partial 
detonation  wave  propagates  down  a  sample  line. 
These  partial  failures  show  up  as  anomalies  in 
the dent track where the width of the dent will vary 
down  the  length  of  the  line  as  in  Figure  3b 
compared  to  the  constant-width  dents  typically 
seen  as  in  Figure  3a.  Note  that  the  detonation 
failed near the end of this particular track due to a 
macro-scale defect in the film. In films where the 
HNAB  thickness  is  just  below  failure  there  is 
often  evidence  of  partial  detonation  near  the 
initiation site followed by a narrowing of the dent 
track to a point as the detonation tunnels into the 
film  prior  to  failure  Figure  3c.  In  addition 
films  near  tf  often  produce  a  cross-hatch  pattern 
near the edges of the dent track as shown in Figure 
3d  similar  to  patterns  often  recorded  in  soot 
coatings following gaseous detonations see  11 for 
an overview or in experiments with TNT.12 
Fig.  3.  Optical  micrographs  of  a  a  normal  dent 
track  b  an  abnormal  dent  track  in  a  film  just 
above  the  failure  thickness  and  c  a  tunneling 
dent  track  from  a  film  just  below  the  failure 
thickness.  d  SEM  image  showing  a  cross-hatch 
pattern  often  found  near  the  edges  of  dent  tracks 
left  by  confined  HNAB  films  that  were  near  the 
failure thickness. Detonations ran from left to right 
in all of the above images. 
explosives  have  typically  been  performed  in  a 
cylindrical geometry using rate sticks composed of 
a stack of pressed pellets13 it is  more convenient 
to test thin film specimens using a slab geometry. 
Petel  et  al.14  have  shown  that  for  heterogeneous 
explosives with only fine scale heterogeneities the 
critical  diameter  in  the  cylindrical  geometry  and 
the critical thickness in a slab geometry are related 
by a factor of two dttc  2. Since our analysis of 
porosity  shows  that  these  HNAB  films  do  have 
only  very  fine  scale  heterogeneities  we  can 
directly  compare  our  critical  thickness  data  with 
critical  diameter  experiments  performed  for  other 
explosive materials. 
Unconfined  HNAB  films  show  a  trend  in 
detonation  velocity  that  is  similar  to  many  other 
explosive  materials13  with  a  gradual  decrease  in 
thickness. However the film thicknesses at which 
a detonation can propagate are much thinner than 
is  typical  for  many  explosive  materials.  While 
many  explosive  materials  fail  to  detonate  at 
thicknesses smaller than a millimeter or so HNAB 
films are able to sustain a detonation at thicknesses 
slightly  below  70  microns  in  a  slab  geometry 
which  translates  to  a  diameter  of  about  140 
microns  in  a  cylindrical  geometry.  While  this  is 
much smaller than many other explosive materials 
detonation  at  this  length  scale  is  not  unheard  of 
and a number of other materials have been shown 
to  be  capable  of  sustaining  detonation  at  similar 
24681012hexanitrostilbene 
hexanitro-24681012-hexaazaisowurtzitane CL20.15 
Confining  the  HNAB  with  small  amounts  of 
copper has a substantial effect on tf reducing it by 
more than a factor of two from 65 m to 27 m. 
However  there  was  no  appreciable  impact  on 
detonation  velocity  at  thicknesses  substantially 
larger  than  tf.  This  is  not  a  surprising  result 
the  homogeneous-like  detonation 
behavior of the HNAB films. Confinement is not 
expected  to  have  an  effect  on  D2  and  for  a 
homogeneous  explosive  detonation  velocity  very 
quickly approaches that of the infinite material as 
thickness increases above tf which results in only 
a  narrow  range  of  HNAB  thicknesses  where 
velocity is substantially impacted by confinement. 
While  most  of  the  data  in  Figures  1  and  2 
follow the general trends fairly well several points 
appear  to  lie  outside  the  trends  by  more  than  the 
unconfined  data  shown  in  Figure  1  this  is  likely 
due to small variations in film microstructure that 
may  result  from  minor  differences  in  deposition 
in  ambient  conditions  during 
crystallization.    For  the  confined  films  shown  in 
Figure 2 there is the added uncertainty related to 
their  measurements.  For 
adhesion  between  the  explosive  and  confinement 
layers. Data points with anomalously low velocity 
may  be  the  result  of  local  regions  with  poor 
the  effectiveness  of 
The  relationship  between  detonation  velocity 
and explosive thickness or radius for a cylindrical 
charge  can  be  fit  using  a  phenomenological 
approach developed by Campbell and Engelke13 
where Dt and D are the detonation velocities 
detonation and A is a fitting parameter with units 
of length. Detonation velocity data for unconfined 
HNAB films and those confined with 1.3 microns 
of copper are fitted to this form in a D vs. 1t plane 
are shown in Figure 4. A best fit to the data returns 
D  7.424  0.012 mms A  0.120  0.043 
m  and  tc    63.4    1.3  m  for  the  unconfined 
films and D  7.411  0.016 mms A  0.021 
 0.020 m and tc  24.6  1.1 m for those with 
1.3 microns of copper. Note that while the critical 
thickness tc from this fit and the experimentally 
determined failure thickness tf often have similar 
values  they  have  different  significance.  The 
critical  thickness  is  simply  a  fitting  parameter  in 
Eq. 1 with no direct physical meaning while the 
failure  thickness  is  an  empirical  measurement  of 
where an explosive material is unable to sustain a 
detonation. However since Dt - as t tc this 
implies that tf must be greater than tc.  
The  ratio  Atc  provides  a  non-dimensional 
measure  of  how  quickly  the  detonation  velocity 
drops to zero as the thickness approaches failure. 
For  many  pressed  or  cast  explosives  this  ratio  is 
on  the  order  of  unity.13  Larger  ratios  indicate  a 
more gradual decrease in detonation velocity over 
a  larger  range  of  explosive  thicknesses  while 
smaller ratios reflect smaller changes in detonation 
velocity  until  approaching  nearer  to  the  failure 
thickness where the velocity drops more abruptly. 
For  unconfined  HNAB  films  this  ratio  is  small 
0.002  which  indicates  that  the  detonation 
velocity changes little until approaching very near 
the  failure  thickness  where  a  steep  drop  in 
velocity  is  observed.  For  the  confined  HNAB 
is  even  smaller  0.0008 
indicating  even  less  change  in  velocity  when 
approaching  failure.  This  type  of  behavior  is 
generally  associated  with  homogeneous  explosive 
materials  like  liquid  nitromethane  heterogeneous 
explosives  tend  to  have  larger  Atc  ratios  and  a 
more  gradual  decrease  in  detonation  velocity  as 
they  approach  their  failure  thickness.16  17  This 
suggests  that  the  heterogeneities  present  in  the 
HNAB films grains on the order of a few hundred 
nanometers pores of similar sizes or smaller6 are 
on a fine scale compared to the relevant detonation 
phenomena reaction zone allowing it to behave 
like  a  homogeneous  material.  Given  the  typical 
size of both the pores and grains in these films an 
approximate lower bound for the reaction zone of 
about 0.5 m is suggested. 
Campbell  Engelke form unconfined
Campbell and Engelke form 1.3 m confinement
0.005 0.01 0.015 0.02 0.025 0.03 0.035 0.04 0.045
Fig. 4. Plot of detonation velocity vs. 1thickness 
for unconfined HNAB films and those with 1.3 m 
copper  confinement.  The  data  are  fit  using  a 
Campbell and Engelke.13 
The  data  on  confined  films  can  be  used  to 
ascertain  reaction  zone  length  in  HNAB  films 
confinement thickness. It is important to note that 
in these experiments we are concerned only with 
the  confinement  of  the  detonation  shock  and  not 
the  confinement  of  the  product  gasses.  The 
interaction between a detonating explosive and an 
adjacent confinement layer can allow a detonation 
to propagate at smaller length scales than would be 
possible for the unconfined material. The details of 
these  interactions  can  be  understood  through  a 
shock  polar  analysis  such  as  those  described  by 
Stewart  and  Bdzil18  or  by  Aslam  and  Bdzil.19 
Conceptually as a detonation front travels through 
a confined explosive a shock will be sent into the 
confinement.  However  when  the  shock  reaches 
the  free  surface  of  the  confinement  a  pressure 
release  wave  or  rarefaction  will  travel  back 
through the confinement towards the interface with 
the reacting explosive. If the confinement is thick 
enough  that  the  time  it  takes  for  the  shock  and 
rarefaction waves to travel through it is longer than 
completely  pass  the  rarefaction  will  not  interact 
with  the  reaction  zone  and  the  detonation  will 
progress as though the confinement was infinitely 
thick. However if the confinement is very thin the 
rarefaction  will  arrive  before  the  reaction  zone 
completely passes affecting the progression of the 
detonation  front.  By  establishing  the  minimum 
the  confinement  behaves  as 
though  it  were  effectively  infinite  one  can  infer 
the corresponding size of the reaction zone. 
the  reaction  zone 
To  use  these  data  to  estimate  reaction  zone 
length  several  assumptions  are  made.  Since 
HNAB behaves very much like an ideal explosive 
we  expect  there  to  be  little  curvature  of  the 
detonation  front  at  these  small  length  scales    so 
detonation  front  with  no  curvature  moving 
through  the  sample.  The  speeds of  the  shock  and 
rarefaction through the confinement are estimated 
from  the  longitudinal  speeds  of  sound  through 
bulk copper 4.76 mms and chromium 5.94 
mms.  As  no  increase  in  failure  thickness  was 
observed  with  decreasing  confinement  thickness 
down  to  400  nm  we  use  this  as  the  minimum 
infinite  confinement 
detonation  front.11  12  That  the  cross-hatching  is 
more readily apparent in regions near the edge of 
the  explosive  track  where  the  thickness  starts  to 
decrease and external losses are more severe and 
as films approach the failure thickness support this 
assertion.  The  question  remains  whether  we  can 
glean any relevant information from these patterns. 
Experiments  with  cast  and  pressed  TNT  suggest 
that  the  spacing  of  the  transverse  wave  patterns 
scales  with  failure  diameter12  and  experiments 
with gaseous explosives point to the spacing being 
proportional  to  the  reaction  zone  thickness.23 
While the spacing of the transverse wave patterns 
to  provide  some  qualitative 
information  when  comparing  detonations 
similar materials e.g. between HNAB films with 
different porosity distributions it is unlikely that 
such  data  could  be  used  as  an  independent 
quantitative measurement of reaction zone length. 
determine an upper bound on reaction zone length. 
Since  we  do  see  a  difference  in  failure  thickness 
when confinement is further decreased to 250 nm 
we can use this value to determine a lower bound. 
With these confinement thicknesses a rarefaction 
explosiveconfinement 
interface  between  96  and  160  ps.  The  detonation 
front  moving  at  7.4  mms  will  have  traveled 
between  roughly  0.7  and  1.2  m  before  the 
rarefaction  arrives  providing  bounds  for 
reaction zone length. Note that for these estimates 
we  do  not  discriminate  between  chromium  and 
copper except for their sound speeds as they have 
minimal  differences  in  shock  impedance.  These 
bounds  are  in good  agreement  with  the  argument 
above  regarding  the  homogeneous-like  explosive 
behavior  of  HNAB  films  and  the  length  scale  of 
the heterogeneities present in the films.  
This  technique  for  determining  reaction  zone 
several  advantages  over  more 
commonly  used  methods 
measuring the curvature of the detonation front13 20 
variation in particle velocity during detonation.21 22 
Since  many  ideal  explosives  show  very  little 
detonation  front  curvature  it  can  be  difficult  to 
measure  especially  at  small  scales  hence  the 
detonation curvature technique is most often used 
with  materials  having  reaction  zone  lengths  in 
excess of 1 mm. Optical methods rely on directly 
measuring  the  width  of  the  von  Neumann  spike 
during  detonation  and  can  be  used  to  observe 
determination  of  reaction  zone  lengths  using  this 
method  may  require  extremely  fine  temporal 
resolution  on  the  order  of  tens  to  hundreds  of 
picoseconds  and  precise  definition  of 
Chapman-Jouguet  C-J  state  of  the  explosive 
which  in  turn  requires  detailed  information  about 
the equation of state EOS of both the unreacted 
explosive  and  its  products  information  that  is 
often unavailable or unreliable.21 22 Our technique 
is  best  suited  for  near-ideal  explosive  materials 
with  small  reactions  zones  since  they  will  only 
require  thin  confinement  layers  and  has  the 
benefit of not requiring detailed EOS information. 
The  abnormal  dent  tracks  and  cross-hatching 
in  some  substrates  following 
detonation  strongly  suggest  instabilities  in  the 
Physical vapor deposition was shown to be an 
confinement  layers  with  pristine  interfaces  using 
HNAB and copper as a model system. Unconfined 
HNAB films were able to detonate at thicknesses 
greater  than  65  microns  and  had  a  velocity  vs. 
thickness  profile  characteristic  of  homogeneous 
explosives.  Very  little  copper  was  needed  to 
provide effectively infinite confinement as HNAB 
films  detonated  with 
just  400  nm  copper 
confinement  reduced  the  failure  thickness  to  27 
microns  the  same  as  for  HNAB  detonated  with 
much thicker confinement layers. Using these data 
we  have  been  able  to  bound  the  reaction  zone 
length  of  these  HNAB  films  to  be  between  0.7 
and 1.2 microns and the time scale of the relevant 
reactions to less than 160 ps. 
The authors would like to thank Sandias early 
career  Laboratory  Directed  Research 
Development program and the Joint Department of 
of  Energy  Munitions 
Technology  Development  Program 
support of this project. The authors would also like 
to  thank  M.  Barry  Ritchey  and  Ryan  Wixom  for 
help  with  microstructure  characterization  J. 
Patrick Ball and Jill C. Miller for assistance with 
detonation  experiments  and  Larry  G.  Hill  at  Los 
Alamos  National  Laboratories  for  many  useful 
discussions.  Sandia  National  Laboratories  is  a 
multi-program  laboratory  managed  and  operated 
by Sandia Corporation a wholly owned subsidiary 
of  Lockheed  Martin  Corporation  for  the  U.S. 
Department of Energys National Nuclear Security 
contract  DE-AC0494AL85000. Mechanical and thermal characteristics of LLM-105 molecular crystals 
Sergei Kucheyev Alexander E. Gash Philip F. Pagoria Karl Thomas Lorenz 
David am Ende Shilpa Amato Li Jeng Ping Sarah Rothstein Jerry Salan  
Energetic Materials Center Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94551. 
Nalas Engineering Inc.  Centerbrook CT 06409 
Abstract. The deformation behavior of 010-oriented LLM-105 was studied and compared 
with that of -HMX molecular crystals by nanoindentation with pyramidal Berkovich and 
spherical 19 m-diameter indenters. Results reveal indentation elastic moduli of 21 and 18 
GPa and Berkovich hardness of 0.73 and 0.65 GPa for LLM-105 and HMX respectively. For 
LLM-105 but not for HMX indentation stress remains essentially unchanged for spherical 
indentation strains of 10-25 suggesting that inelastic deformation above a certain strain 
proceeds via flow at constant stress. Both materials exhibit highly anisotropic surface fracture 
patterns  after  Berkovich  and  spherical  indentation  consistent  with  fracture  along  011 
cleavage  planes.  No  deformation-induced  material  decomposition  is  observed  in  either 
material for the indentation conditions used.  Thermal analysis technique DSC was used to 
elucidate  the  decomposition  kinetics  and  compare  stability  of  pristine  and  acid-included 
LLM-105 samples derived via a new synthetic method.   Two thermal  stability assessment 
approaches Differential Scanning CalorimetryAdvanced Kinetics and Technology Solutions 
DSCAKTS  and  accelerated  rate  calorimetry  ARC  resulted  in  similar  stability  data 
representing  good  consistency  and  validation  of  the  methods.    Acid-inclusion  in  LLM-105 
resulted in a decrease of its thermal stability. 
in  engineered  applications. 
The mechanical and thermal characteristics of 
explosive  materials  are  important  features  that 
strongly  influence  the  scope  of  the  use  of  those 
26-diamino-35explosive 
dinitropyrazine-1-oxide 
reported  in  1998.1    Since  then  interest  in  this 
molecule  has  evolved  from  general  to  more 
applied  studies.  The  importance  of  materials  like 
insensitive  munitions 
molecule has a unique balance of excellent thermal 
and shock insensitivity with high energy density.23 
In  the  development  of  chemical  synthetic 
materials it is common for new synthetic routes to 
target  materials  to  be  discovered  and  developed.   
availability toxicity and cost of the molecule and 
its  precursors  as  well  as  the  clear  benefits  of 
simplifying the synthetic process if possible.  The 
Historically it is derived from nitration amination 
is  an  example  of 
the  starting  material  26and  oxidation  of 
dimethoxypyrazine  DMP. 
synthetic method has been reported for LLM-105 
26diaminopyrazine-1-oxide  DAPO.4    This  method 
is  potentially  a  more  desirable  approach  as  it 
involves  fewer  synthetic  steps  than  the  DMP 
method  and only  creates  the  explosive  in  the  last 
The  utilization  of  a  new  synthetic  method 
brings  with  it  the  potential  for  new  impurities  in 
the  material.    These  impurities  can  consist  of 
product  and  isomers  of  the  desired  molecule.  
With explosives the identity and amount of those 
impurities  is  often  critical  to  the  safety  and 
performance properties of the material.5
reagents  undesired 
During  the  development  the  LLM-105  from 
DAPO method it was found trace acid impurities 
nitric acid and sulfuric acid can be present in the 
isolated  LLM-105  solid.  The  isolation  of  LLM105  is  achieved  using  a  water  quench  that  may 
result  in  acidic  water  being  included  in  the 
crystals.  One purpose of this study is to determine 
the  effect  of  these  trace  contaminants  on  the 
thermal stability of DAPO-derived LLM-105.  
Thermal analysis tools were used to elucidate 
the  decomposition  kinetics  and  compare  stability 
samples.  The  application  of 
thermoanalytical  techniques  is  accepted  for  the 
characterization  of  the  degradation  of  solids.6   It 
was decided to calculate and compare the time of 
maximum rate under adiabatic conditions TMRad 
for the pure and acid included samples. TMRad is 
defined  as  the  time  a  thermal  explosion  takes  to 
develop  under  adiabatic  conditions.7   TMRad  and 
its  application  to  energetic  material  stability  has 
been demonstrated and is applicable to our goal of 
determining  the  influence  of  acid  impurities  on 
thermal stability. 8 
Organic  molecular  crystals  are  made  of 
molecules  with  strong  covalent  intra-molecular 
bonding  packed  into  crystals  by  relatively  weak 
These  crystals  often  have  low  symmetry  and 
highly  anisotropic  properties.  Important  examples 
of  man-made  organic  molecular  crystals  are 
prevalent  in  food  pharmaceutical  and  energetic 
materials  industries.  In  all  these  applications  the 
mechanical  deformation  behavior  of  individual 
organic  crystals  is  of  practical  importance  and  is 
determined  by  materials  fundamental  elastic 
plastic and fracture mechanisms. 
The mechanical deformation of single crystals 
of high explosives plays an important role in both 
the fabrication of polymer-bonded explosives and 
decomposition and detonation.11  This study details 
the  deformation  behavior  of  LLM-105  and  HMX 
molecular crystals by nanoindentation.  We are not 
aware  of  any  previous  reports  on  mechanical 
properties  of  single  crystal  LLM-105.  Here  we 
use  nano-indentation  for  a  comparative  study  of 
the  mechanical  deformation  of  LLM-105  and 
HMX.  Although the stress field under an indenter 
tip  is  much  more  complex  than  for  conventional 
uniaxial  compression  experiments 
results are directly relevant to real-life problems of 
contact damage occurring on handling compaction 
pressing  and  machining  of  organic  molecular 
crystals. Our results reveal that both LLM-105 and 
HMX have similar Youngs moduli and Berkovich 
indentation hardness with LLM-105 being slightly 
stiffer  and  significantly  softer  at  spherical 
indentation strains above 10. Both materials are 
also brittle exhibiting anisotropic contact-induced 
surface  crack  patterns  consistent  with  fracture 
along 011 cleavage planes. 
The  following  procedure  was  used  to 
grow LLM-105 crystals. First 3.5 g of LLM-105 
was stirred with 25 ml of cid19598 sulfuric acid at 
50  C  to  give  a  clear  solution  with  some  solids 
floating.  Filtration was carried out to remove the 
insoluble  solids  through  a  fritted  funnel  and  the 
filtrate  was  allowed  to  cool  to  room  temperature. 
About 1 g of the LLM-105 crystalline precipitate 
was collected and re-dissolved in 20 ml of 9598 
sulfuric  acid  at  room  temperature  to  give  a  clear 
solution. This solution was placed in a cylindrical 
recrystallization  dish  with  a  diameter  of  70mm 
and  a  height  of  50mm  and  allowed  to  stand  at 
room  temperature  without  a  cover  for  30  days 
during  which  time  large  clear  yellow  crystals 
grew. The final crystals cid10.5  0.2  0.1 mm3 in 
size  were  collected  by  filtration  and  dried  by 
The -HMX crystal cid12  2  0.1 mm3 in 
size  was  grown  by  H.H.  Cady  at  Los  Alamos 
National Laboratory by slow evaporation from an 
acetone  solution.  In  contrast  to  the  LLM-105 
surfaces  were  studied  the  010  surface  of  the 
HMX  crystal  was  mechanically  polished  prior  to 
characterization. The polishing was done on 30  1 
m  alumina  grit  sheets  as  described  in  detail  by 
for  which  as-grown 
The  following  procedure  was  used  to 
produce  pure  sublimed  LLM-105.  Into  a  medium 
sized  sublimation  apparatus equipped with  a  cold 
finger is placed 4-5 grams of LLM-105.  Ice water 
is added to the cold finger.  Vacuum is applied to 
the  system  and  the  LLM-105  is  heated  to  210220C  using  a  high-temperature  silicone  oil 
bath.     Using  a  diffusion  pump  at  10-3  torr  the 
in  about  4  hours  at 
210C.   The LLM-105 is recovered from the cold 
finger by gently scraping with a plastic spatula
The  following  procedure  was  used  to 
included  LLM-105.  A  100-ml 
EasyMaxTM  reactor  with  overhead  stirring  glass 
stirrer and Teflon coated temperature probe were 
used  for  the  chemical  reaction  and  quench.  The 
reaction mixture was dosed into the deionized DI 
quench  water  at  a  rate  of  1.0  mlmin  which  was 
stirring  at  320  RPM  and  controlled  at  T1C. 
Upon completion of the reaction mixture dose into 
the quench the quenched material was stirred for 
an  additional  ten  minutes  prior  to  filtration.  The 
product  filter  cake  was  washed  twice  with  30  ml 
DI water.  The isolated yield for this reaction was 
Prior  to  characterization  the  samples 
were glued to Si wafers. They were examined by 
scanning  electron  microscopy  SEM  at  2  kV. 
Mechanical properties were studied by indentation 
in  the  load-controlled  mode  in  an  MTS  XP 
nanoindenter  with  Berkovich  and  19m-diameter 
unloading rates were kept constant to maintain an 
indentation  strain  rate  of  103s1.13    Hardness  H 
was defined as average contact pressure. Stiffness 
was characterized by Youngs modulus E which 
was  calculated  based  on  the  continuous  stiffness 
measurement CSM according to the Oliver-Pharr 
method.1415    In  Oliver-Pharr  calculations  we 
ratios  of  diamond  and 
molecular  crystals  of  0.07  and  0.3  respectively 
and  a  Youngs  modulus  of  diamond  of  1141 
GPa.1011    Tip  area  functions  for  both  indenters 
were  calibrated  by  indentation  of  a  fused  silica 
standard.  Indentation  stressstrain  curves  were 
displacement data as described previously.13 
Instruments used for the study of thermal 
stability  of  LLM-105  sublimed  and  LLM-105 
acid-contaminated  solids  included  a  Differential 
Scanning  Calorimeter  DSC  and  Accelerating 
Rate Calorimeter ARC. For these measurements 
a  Mettler  Toledo Polymer  DSC  with  an  auto 
sampler  was  used. 
 The  sample  pans  were 
manufactured  by  the  Swiss  Institute  for  the 
Promotion of Safety and Security. The gold plated 
high pressure HP pans model M20 were sealed 
using  a  Schmidt  toggle  press.  The  ARC254  was 
manufactured  by Netzsch. The  test  bombs  were 
constructed of titanium 1 or  or stainless steel 
from Netzsch or  Fauske.  The  DSC  data  were 
Technology  Solutions  AKTS    Thermokinetics 
software.    The  DSC  data  collected  during  nonisothermal  experiments  carried  out  at  different 
heating  rates  were  used  for  determination  of  the 
kinetic  parameters  and  thereafter  applied  for 
prediction of  the  reaction  course under  arbitrarily 
chosen temperature modes6.
using  Advanced  Kinetics 
Stoessel7 reviews the origin and definition 
of TMRad.  It is further derived in Equation 1.  The 
time  is  calculated  under  adiabatic  conditions  for 
zero-order conditions.  Equation 1 utilizes the heat 
release  rate  of  the  reaction  qo  at  the  initial 
conditions To with the specific heat capacity of the 
sample cp and activation energy of the reaction E.  
                       1       
For the acid-included LLM105 the composition of 
acid  was  0.556  sulfuric  acid  and  0.083  nitric 
acid  with  the  remainder  99.36  LLM-105.  The 
sublimed LLM-105 has purity of 100. 
Figure  1  a  shows  representative  load-displacement  curves  of  LLM-105  and  HMX 
crystals indented with a Berkovich tip.  
load  and  a  significant 
branch i.e. loading curve discontinuities when the 
indenter experiences excursions at constant load 
some  degree  of  stress  relaxation  evidenced  by 
indenter  displacement  when  it  is  held  at  the 
component  evidenced  by  residual  deformation 
after load removal.1617  All these features except 
for the pop-in events are also present in the loaddisplacement  curve  for 
Fig.1a.    Such  pop-in  events  are  commonly 
attributed  to  sudden  generation  andor  movement 
of dislocations at critical stress levels.17
Figures 1b and 1c show dependencies of E 
and  H  respectively  on  the  indenter  penetration 
depth  h  for  both  LLM-105  and  HMX  crystals. 
They reveal that while H slightly decreases with h 
for both materials E is essentially independent of 
h for h  300 nm. A steep increase in both E and 
H  for  h    300  nm  could  be  attributed  to  surface 
roughness  effects.  It  is  also  seen  from  Figs.  1b 
and 1c that although both materials have similar 
Berkovich  hardness  values  LLM-105  is  slightly 
stiffer  than  HMX  see  also  Table  I.  The  low 
stiffness of these materials cid1 20 GPa is a direct 
intermolecular  bonding. 
Higher E of LLM-105 is consistent with its higher 
melting  point  since  both  E  and  the  melting  point 
reflect the average bonding energy in the material. 
Table 1.  Properties of the 010 LLM-105 and 
010 HMX crystals studied. 
We  are  not  aware  of  any  previous 
measurements of E for LLM-105.  The value of E 
of  cid1-HMX  measured  here  17.61.2  GPa  is 
consistent with theoretical estimates of Sewell and 
Menikoff  1821  GPa.  18  It  is  however  lower 
than both rough estimates by Palmer and Field 31 
nanoindentation  for  010  cid1-HMX  by  Li  et  al. 
23.18    1.15  GPa  while  the  E  value  measured 
here is significantly larger than those measured by 
light  scattering  by  Zaug  414  GPa  and  Stevens 
Fig.  1.    a  Load-displacement  curves  and  depth 
dependencies  of  b  Youngs  modulus  and  c 
hardness  of  010  LLM-105  and  010  -HMX 
crystals indented with a Berkovich pyramidal tip. 
The  maximum  load  was  kept  constant  for  60  s 
before  unloading.  Arrows  in  a  indicate  the 
locations  of  pop-in  events  for  the  LLM-105 
crystal. For clarity only every 100th experimental 
point is depicted in a. 
It  reveals  the  following  deformation  features  of 
LLM-105  multiple  pop-in  events  on  the  loading 
patterns  and  more  work  is  currently  needed  to 
better  understand  the  fracture  behavior  of  LLM105. 
Figures  3a  and  3b  show 
displacement  curves  for  LLM-105  and  HMX 
crystals  respectively 
loaded  with  a  19-cid1mdiameter  spherical  indenter  in  partial  loadunload 
mode  with  full  unloading  after  every  loading 
cycle.    Also  shown  in  Figs.  3a  and  3b  by 
dashed lines are predictions of the Hertzian model 
with Youngs moduli from Table 1 revealing that 
the  deformation  becomes  elasticplastic  for  h   
100 nm.10  Multiple pop-in events attributed to the 
initiation of plastic deformation are clearly seen in 
Figs.  3a  and  3b  for  LLM-105.  Such  a 
consistent with Berkovich-indentation results from 
Fig.  1a  discussed  above.    Figures  2c  and  2d 
show  SEM  images  of  residual  impressions  made 
on the surface of LLM-105 and HMX crystals by 
indentation  with  a  19-cid1m-diameter 
maximum load of 120 mN.  It reveals evidence of 
plastic  deformation  within  the  contact  circle  and 
surface cracks that do not follow Hertzian pattern 
of  ring  and  conical  cracks.  Instead  fracture 
proceeds highly anisotropically along the cleavage 
planes as for the case of Berkovich indentation of 
load-displacement  behavior 
During  spherical  indentation  as  opposed 
indentation  with  a  pyramidal  Berkovich 
indenter discussed above the effective indentation 
strain  increases  with  increasing  depth  and  the 
elastic  stress  field  under  the  indenter  has  no 
singularities.    Hence  spherical  indentation  could 
indentation  stressstrain 
curves.  The  inset  in  Fig.  3b  shows  stressstrain 
curves  derived  from  spherical  indentation  data  as 
described above.  It reveals that for LLM-105 the 
stress saturates for indentation strains above cid110 
and  the  material  exhibits  plastic  flow  at  constant 
stress.  Our  data  however  cannot  differentiate 
between  contributions 
twinning  and  fracture.  More  work  is  currently 
needed to better understand anisotropic mechanical 
properties  of  LLM-105  and  HMX  crystals  and  to 
reveal the underlying deformation mechanisms. 
inelastic  deformation 
and  Eckhardt  811  GPa.  12192021    More  work  is 
currently  needed  to  ascertain  the  reasons  of  such 
large discrepancies. 
Figures  2a  and  2b  compare  SEM 
images  of  the  residual  impressions  left  on  LLM105  and  HMX  crystals 
respectively  after 
indentation  with  a  Berkovich  tip  to  a  maximum 
load  of  50  mN.  These  images  highlight  the 
brittleness  of  both  materials  revealing  surface 
cracks around residual impressions. Moreover the 
surface  cracks  are  anisotropic  propagating  along 
Fig.  2.  SEM  images  of  residual  impressions  on 
ac  010  LLM-105  and  bd    010  HMX crystals indented with ab a Berkovich 
tip  to  a  maximum  load  of  50  mN  and  cd  a 
19-m-diameter  spherical  tip  to  a  maximum  load 
of  120  mN.  Insets  in  a  and  b  show  lowmagnification  SEM  images  of  the  LLM-105  and 
HMX  crystals  studied  with  horizontal  image 
widths of 0.6 and 3.0 mm respectively. 
This suggests that the preferential cleavage planes 
are  common  in  both  materials  which  is  not 
crystallography.  Previous indentation studies have 
identified the major cleavage along 011 planes of 
HMX.    Cracks  formed  along  011  planes  would 
intersect  the  010  surface  along  lines  in  100 
directions  which  is  consistent  with  the  fracture 
patterns  in  Fig.  2.    However  other  fracture 
systems could also result in the same surface crack 
Presented curves indicate that the acid-included lot 
decomposes  at  lower  temperature  based  on  the 
lower peak temperature of 332 C as compared to 
sublimed  LLM-105  peak  temperature  of  352  C.  
The  heat  of  decomposition  for  the  acid-included 
lot  is  significantly  higher  than  the  sublimed  lot 
see text below suggesting a different mechanistic 
pathway between the two samples. For the kinetic 
evaluation  of  the  process  used  later  for  further 
simulations  the  set  of  data  collected  at  different 
heating rates is required.  
Fig. 4.  DSC traces of acid-included and sublimed 
lots of LLM-105. Samples were heated from 30 to 
400 C at 4 Kmin. The sample sizes were 0.35 and 
0.36 mg respectively sealed in gold-plated highpressure  DSC  pans.  Exothermic  peaks  are 
displayed upwards.  
AKTS-Thermokinetics  
The thermal analysis of the samples was 
performed non-isothermally at heating rates of 0.5 
1 2 4 and 8 Kmin with a sample masses between 
The  average  heat  of  decomposition 
determined  from  all  DSC  traces  amounted  to      2118    127  Jg  for  the  sublimed  LLM-105  and  2837    460  Jg  for  the  acid-included  LLM-105. 
The  relatively  larger  scatter  of  the  reaction  heat 
values for the acid-included sample is likely due to 
slight  sample  inhomogeneity  resulted  from  the 
consistent  DSC  results  when  only  one  or  two 
sample crystals are used 0.3 to 0.5 mg. 
AKTS kinetic software provides a global 
kinetic  model  based  on  isoconversional  analysis.  
Determined  kinetic  parameters  of  the  reaction 
Fig.  3  Load-displacement  curves  of    a  010 
LLM-105 and b 010 -HMX crystals indented 
with a 19-m-diameter spherical tip. Loading was 
performed  as  a  series  of  load-unload  cycles  with 
complete unloading at the end of each cycle. Dash 
lines  are  predictions  of  the  Hertzian  model  with 
Youngs moduli values from Table 1. The inset in 
b  shows  the  spherical  indentation  stress-strain 
curves for both crystals. 
thermal  stability  based  on 
DSC  affords  a  determination  of  thermal 
events  occurring  during  heating  due 
chemical reactions and physical changes. It allows 
evaluating the heats of decomposition temperature 
of  melting  points  and  heat  of  phase  transitions.  
For  thermally  unstable  materials  it  provides  a 
evaluation of the temperature where the beginning 
of  thermal  event  is  detected  or  peak  temperature.  
The shape of the DSC curve is also informative by 
supplying  e.g.  the  information  concerning  the 
temperature  range  of  the  investigated  process 
occurrence  of  sub-stages  during  decomposition 
etc. In Figure 4 the DSC traces of sublimed LLM105  and  acid-included  LLM105  are  shown.  
TMR  and  comparing  the  obtained  simulations 
with those obtained with another technique ARC. 
LLM-105 Acid-inclusion
Fig.  5.    Time-to-maximum  rate  computed  using 
kinetic  parameters  determined  from  DSC  scans 
with  AKTS  software  for  sublimed  and  acidincluded LLM105. 
Figure 5 shows a comparison of TMR for the acid 
included and sublimed LLM-105 lots.  These data 
are useful for predicting safe holding temperatures. 
For  example  for  the  purpose  of  discussion  the 
TMRad at 24 hours TD24 was selected to compare 
stability of the samples.  The TD24 of the sublimed 
LLM-105  was  predicted  to be  near 256  C  while 
for  the  acid-included  lot  the  predicted  value  of 
TD24 amounts to 221 C. The results of presented 
simulations  confirm  that  the  acid-included  lot  is 
indeed  significantly  less  thermally  stable  than 
Comparison  of  TMRad  determined  by  DSC  and 
ARC  has  the  advantage  of  generating 
both temperature and pressure data simultaneously 
to further assist in studies of thermal process safety 
of energetic materials. In our study we use ARC to 
independently  determine  the  TMR  as  well  as 
measure  pressure  profile. 
compared  the  safety  data  TMRad  determined  by 
both ARC and DSC techniques.  
Figure  6  shows  the  self-heat  rate  and 
pressure  during  the  ARC  experiments.  The  acidincluded  sample  begins  to  self-heat  much  earlier 
than  the  sublimed  one.  The  pressure  follows  the 
same  pattern  indicating  that  gaseous  byproducts 
are  generated  at  lower  temperature  for  the  acidincluded lot. TD24 value for the sublimed LLM-105 
based  on  phi-corrected  ARC  data  amounts  to  ca. 
250  C  compared  with  the  DSC-based  AKTS 
prediction  of  256  C.  It  should  be  noted  that 
careful analysis of the pressure rise rates indicate 
gaseous byproducts being generated as low as 210 
C well below the detection of the thermal events. 
the  acid-included  LLM-105  ARC  phicorrected and DSC-based values of TD24 amount to 
232 and 221 C respectively.  Again pressure rise 
rates suggest formation of gaseous byproducts near 
195 C. One should however always keep in mind 
that the influence of the phi-factor corrections on 
the prediction of TD24 is strongly dependent of the 
the  kinetic  model.  The  phi-factor 
corrections  based  on  single  ARC  curves  are 
generally based on a kinetic assumption of zero-th 
order and should be therefore treated with due care 
when used for the prediction of TD24.  
Sample Temperature oC
Sample Temperature oC
Fig. 6. ARC results with PHI9.6 for acid included 
and  sublimed  LLM-105  Left  plot  presents  the 
self-heat  rate  and  right  the  pressure  vs.  sample 
The  comparison  of  the  temperature  profile 
measured  during  ARC  experiment  with  those 
simulated  using  kinetic  parameters  gained  from 
DSC  experiments  is  depicted  in  Figure  7  for  the 
sublimed  LLM-105.  As  shown  the  simulated 
reaction course displayed in red AKTS model  is 
overlaid  with  the  heat-wait-search  temperature 
profile  recorded  in  the  ARC  experiment.  In  this 
ARC  run  the  experiment  was  aborted  to  avoid 
exploding  the  test-cell  but  enough  data  was 
obtained to show initial phase of thermal runaway.  
The  AKTS  model  predicts  closely  the  TMRad 
based on the time-temperature history of the ARC Critical detonation thickness in vapor-deposited hexanitroazobenzene HNAB films 
with different preparation conditions
Alexander S. Tappan Ryan R. Wixom and Robert Knepper
Explosives Technologies Group
Sandia National Laboratories Albuquerque NM 87185
Abstract. Hexanitroazobenzene HNAB films were deposited on polycarbonate through 
physical  vapor  deposition.  HNAB  deposits  as  an  amorphous  film  that  subsequently 
crystallizes over time. The temperature under which this crystallization occurs affects the 
microstructure  of  the  HNAB  and  the  resulting  detonation  properties.  By  varying  the 
crystallization conditions experienced by vapor deposited amorphous HNAB changes in 
microstructure  arise  that  affect  near  failure  detonation behavior.  Specifically HNAB 
crystallized at room temperature has uniformly distributed pores with diameters generally 
less  than  150  nm  and  has  a  critical  thickness  of  63.4    1.3  m.  Elevated  temperature 
crystallization  results  in  less-well  distributed  porosity  and  larger  detonation  failure 
At  Sandia  National  Laboratories  we  have 
coined the term microenergetics to describe submillimeter  energetic  material  studies  aimed  at 
gaining  knowledge  of  combustion  and  detonation 
behavior  at  the  mesoscale. Characteristics  of  the 
microstructure especially  porosity dramatically 
influence explosive  behavior  such  as  initiation 
growth to detonation and detonation failure. These 
effects  on  continuum  behavior  have been  shown 
through  experiments  on  detonation  failure  with 
different  particle  sizes  or  specific  surface  area  of 
34dinitrofurazanfuroxan  DNTF  and  24681012hexanitro-24681012-hexaazaisowurtzitane CL201 as  well  as  experiments  on  homogeneous 
explosives  with  added  heterogeneities 
nitromethane-nitroethaneglass  microballoons.2
Mesoscale  and  microscale  behavior  such  as  the
lateral structure at the detonation front3 as well as 
the  overall  rate  of  chemical  energy  release  across 
the length of the reaction zone are assumed to also 
arise from these microstructural features.
Previous  work  on  vapor-deposited  explosives 
has  been  conducted  with  PETN  pentaerythritol 
tetranitrate  utilizing  Sandias  critical  thickness 
experiment.4 5 This  experiment presents  a  twodimensional  analogue  critical  thickness  to  the 
introduced the experiment and geometrical effects
of deposited film  width in the plane of the fused 
silica  substrate  on  failure4 with  later  work 
the  effect  of  PETN  deposition 
conditions.5 We  are  currently  applying  physical 
vapor  deposition  of  explosives  to  examine  the 
effects of confinement on detonation behavior6 as 
well  as  the  effects of  microstructure  arising  from 
deposition conditions on detonation. Through this 
work  we  hope  to  inform  mesoscale  modeling
efforts  that  have  traditionally  relied  on  inferences 
from large-scale experiments.
The present work applies the critical thickness 
detonation  experiment  to  vapor-deposited  HNAB 
hexanitroazobenzene  prepared  under  different 
crystallization  conditions.  HNAB  deposits  as  an 
amorphous film that subsequently crystallizes over 
time.7 We utilize this crystallization as a means to 
prepare  samples  with  different  microstructure 
characteristics to evaluate the effect on detonation 
properties.  The  temperature  under  which  this 
detonation properties such as critical thickness.
HNAB samples are prepared through physical 
vapor  deposition  on  polycarbonate  substrates  in  a 
custom  deposition  chamber.  HNAB  deposits  as  a 
fully  dense  amorphous  film  and  crystallizes  over 
time  to  a  dense  film  99  dense  of  principally 
HNAB-II  with  some  proportion  of  an  unknown 
crystal structure.7 HNAB is deposited in two lines 
on  1.00    3.00  cm  polycarbonate  substrates 
yielding two velocity data sets for each detonation 
experiment. Deposition thicknesses range from 50 
m  to  greater  than  200  m.  Each  line  is 1.6  mm 
wide  and  therefore  side  losses  during  detonation 
are assumed  to  be  insignificant  with  respect  to 
losses associated with the thickness of the film.
After deposition HNAB films are crystallized 
at temperatures ranging from ambient to 85 C. At 
crystallization typically within three to four weeks.
At 65 C the films crystallize within a few hours. 
Crystallization at 85 C above the glass transition 
temperature  70    C  appears  to  change  the 
crystallization mechanism and results in films that 
are different in color and surface appearance than 
Figure 1. Photograph of HNAB films deposited on 
polycarbonate  with 
conditions. The leftmost  film is as-deposited  with 
increasing crystallization temperature to the right.
The characterization of the HNAB films after 
deposition and  crystallization is conducted  with 
optical  microscopy  surface  profilometry  and 
crystallization  film  thickness  is measured  in  13 
locations  along  the  lines  corresponding  to  the 
positions and halfway points of the 7 optical fibers 
used  for  detonation  velocity  measurements  see 
below.  Film  thickness  is  reported  as  the  average 
of  the  13  average  step  heights  across  a  100  m 
band approximately in the center of the film. Error 
is  reported  to  be    the  standard  deviation  of  this 
value. Ion polishing was conducted on some films
using  a  JEOL  IB-09010CP  cross  section  polisher 
to reveal interior features of the microstructure in a 
techniques used  on  other 
explosives.8 Scanning  electron  microscopy  was 
conducted  on  some  films  to  examine  surface 
features as well as interior microstructure.
Detonation velocity was determined using the 
aforementioned  critical  thickness  experiment.4 In 
this experiment a PETN structure is used to ignite 
the  two  deposited  HNAB  lines. Passive  optical 
fiber probes send light from each of the detonating 
experiments that yielded data spanning at least 4 of 
the  optical  fibers  10.5 mm  are  used  in  the  data 
analysis. A linear least squares fit is applied to the 
position  versus  time  data  from  the  photodetectors 
and error is reported as  the standard error of this 
fit.  In  addition  to  the  photodetector  data  the 
detonation  is  simultaneously  recorded  with  a 
framing camera and a streak camera.
Figure  2.  Photographs  of  Sandias  critical 
thickness experiment. a The lower portion of the 
experiment  contains  the  PETN  ignition  structure 
and  b  the  upper  portion  of  experiment  contains 
the deposited HNAB lines and optical fiber probes 
illuminated to show position.
Numerous  experiments  were  conducted  on 
HNAB  lines  of  different  thicknesses  that  were 
crystallized  at  room  temperature  45 C  and  65
C.  In  addition  a  few  scoping  experiments  were 
conducted  on  as-deposited  amorphous  HNAB 
lines and HNAB lines that were crystallized at  85
C  above  the  glass  transition  temperature  of 
HNAB. HNAB lines of thicknesses up to 140 m 
two  conditions  did  not  detonate.
thicknesses of 95 and 102 m crystallized at 45 C
is shown in Figure 3.
in  an  HNAB  sample  with 
Figure 3. Framing camera images of detonation in 
lines  of  a  single  HNAB  sample 
crystallized at 45 C. These images were taken at 
5.4 million  frames-per-second  1185 ns  with  an 
exposure time of 15 ns.
Detonation  in  HNAB  films  crystallized  at 
room temperature 45 C and 65 C was possible 
at thicknesses of 100 m and smaller depending 
on the crystallization conditions. The HNAB  film 
thickness  necessary 
to  sustain  a  detonation 
increased.  Graphs  of  detonation  velocity  versus 
film  thickness  for  HNAB  crystallized  at  these 
three conditions are shown in Figure 4.
the  crystallization 
except for the one open symbol shown in Figure 4
with  a  thickness  of  62.1    0.5  m.  Other 
thicknesses  that  did  not  detonate  are  not  shown. 
The experimental failure thickness tf is defined as 
the  average  thickness  of  the  fire  and  no-fire 
experiments  nearest  failure. The  data  show  a 
monotonic  decrease  in  detonation  velocity  with 
thickness.  Each  detonation 
velocity  calculated  from  the  optical  fiber  probe 
data  within  this  sample  set  has  a  relatively  low 
uncertainty when compared to the data for HNAB 
crystallized at higher temperatures.
The  detonation  velocity  measurements  for 
HNAB crystallized at the two higher temperatures 
of  45  and  65 C  have  distinct  differences  from 
those for HNAB crystallized at room temperature. 
The  most  obvious  difference  is  the  increased 
scatter  in  the  data  and  the  lack  of  a  gradual 
in  detonation  velocity  approaching 
failure.  This  is  especially  true  in  the  data  for 
HNAB  crystallized  at  65 C.  Additionally  the 
error  in  any  individual  velocity  measurement  is 
greater than that for HNAB samples crystallized at 
that  can  be  observed 
The differences in trends within the detonation 
velocity  versus  HNAB  thickness  plots  shown  in 
Figure  4 must  arise  from  physical  differences 
within the film as opposed to chemical differences. 
All  as-deposited  amorphous  films  are  chemically
identical with crystallization temperature being the 
only  difference  between 
qualitative  differences  between  the  crystallized 
profilometry  measurements. 
incidence  of  surface  defects  and  cracks  increases 
with  increasing  crystallization  temperature.  It  is 
reasonable that as crystallization time decreases at 
higher  temperatures  there  is less  time  for  stress 
arising  during  the crystallization  process  to  relax
crystallization typically leads to larger defects and 
greater inconsistencies in the detonation behavior. 
However  these  large  scale  defects  spanning 
hundreds  of  microns  are  not  the  only effects 
arising from crystallizing at different temperatures.
The  microstructure  of  HNAB  crystallized  at 
room temperature as examined using cross section 
for  HNAB  crystallized  at 
Figure  4.  Detonation  velocity  versus  HNAB 
temperature RT bottom 45 C middle and 65
C top. The open symbol represents the thickest 
films where detonation was consistently unable to 
propagate. Thicker  no-fires  are  treated  as  no-tests 
due  to  the  inability  to  measure  a  velocity  and 
presumed initiation issues.
The  detonation  velocity  measurements  for 
HNAB crystallized at room temperature consist of 
16  different  line  thicknesses all  that  detonated 
them.  This  difference 
ion  polishing  and  scanning  electron  microscopy 
reveals  internal  porosity  top  of Figure  5. The 
HNAB  has  uniformly  distributed  pores  with 
diameters generally less than 150 nm as shown in 
the  histogram  at  the  bottom  of  Figure  5. The 
distribution of these pores is uniform as contrasted 
with  the  porosity in  HNAB  crystallized  at  higher 
temperatures. In films crystallized at 45 and 65 C 
the internal porosity consists of fewer larger pores 
that  have  larger  domains  of  non-porous  HNAB 
distribution  can  have  implications on  detonation 
propagation. First  the  more  gradual  decline  in 
detonation  velocity  with  decreasing  thickness  in 
the HNAB crystallized at room temperature could 
result  from  the  distributed  porosity  where  these 
heterogeneities  become  hot  spots  that  support 
thickness.  Second  if  the  distribution  is  such  that 
distances  between  adjacent  pores  exceeds  typical 
length  scales  associated  with  the  reaction  zone 
length    1.2  m6 then  no  coalescence  of  hot 
spots is possible to support reaction.
Figure 5. top Scanning electron micrograph of an 
ion-polished cross-section of HNAB crystallized at 
room  temperature  with distributed  pores  with 
diameters  less  than  150  nm  as  shown  in  the 
Critical thickness data were analyzed similarly 
to the technique used by Campbell and Engelke for 
critical  diameter  data.9 Their  form  for  diameter 
effect  data  can  be  applied  to  films  of  effectively 
infinite  width  by 
thickness.2 Finally the equation can be rewritten to 
facilitate  fitting  data in  the  detonation  velocity 
versus inverse thickness plane
where  DR is  detonation  velocity  at  a  given 
detonation velocity at infinite radius mmPs A is 
a length parameter that describes the shape of the 
curve  near  failure m 
is  a  length  parameter 
experimental  failure  thickness  tf is  different  than
tc which represents a non-physical asymptote.
conditions HNAB  detonation  velocity  versus 
inverse thickness is shown in Figure 6. The single 
open  symbol  at  the  horizontal  axis  for  each  data 
set  is  the  thickest  no-fire  point. For  each  of  the 
three  HNAB  crystallization  conditions 
detonation  velocity 
thickness  is  essentially  identical.  Thus  for  thick 
films  the  characteristics  of  the  HNAB and most 
importantly for this comparison the density is the 
same.  The  differences  in  the  thickness  asymptote 
at  critical  thickness  is  more  pronounced  with 
increasing  crystallization  temperature  leading  to 
microstructure  of  the  HNAB  plays  an  important 
role in behavior near failure likely generating hot 
spots to support reaction. Values for  A and 
tc are shown in Table 1.
Figure  6.  Critical  thickness  curves  for  HNAB 
crystallized  at  room  temperature  45 C  and  65
C. Analysis is conducted in the form of Campbell 
Table  1. Values  for  the  three  parameters  derived 
from  analysis  of  detonation  versus 
thickness  for  HNAB  at 
three  crystallization 
Detonation  was  not  achieved  in  as-deposited 
amorphous HNAB samples as thick as 140 m.
Fracture  cross  sections  of  the  amorphous  films 
show  that  there  is  no  observable  porosity.  This 
lack of porosity prevents hot spot formation during 
initiation  and  no  reaction  is  supported  within  the 
HNAB.  The  amorphous HNAB  represents  an 
extreme condition in a solid explosive where there 
is absolutely  no long-range order crystallinity or 
porosity. Through control of crystallization of this 
amorphous HNAB it may be possible to gradually 
transition  from  homogeneous  to  heterogeneous 
explosive  behavior  in  a  solid  explosive  allowing 
studies on initiation and growth to detonation.
crystallization  conditions  experienced  by  vapor 
microstructure arise that affect detonation behavior 
at  near  failure conditions. Specifically  we  show 
that  HNAB  crystallized  at  room  temperature  has
uniformly  distributed  pores  with  diameters 
generally  less  than  150  nm  and  has  a  critical 
thickness of 63.4  1.3 m.  Elevated temperature 
crystallization  results 
less-well  distributed 
porosity  and  larger  detonation  failure  thicknesses.
Despite  these  differences  in  critical  thickness 
detonation velocity in thick films is consistent and 
thus  we  believe  that  only  the  microstructure  and 
not the density of the films is significantly affected 
by different crystallization conditions. Future work 
Coeur dAlene ID April 11  16 2010 pp. 1087 
Tappan A.S. Knepper R. Wixom R.R. 
Marquez  M.P.  Ball  J.P.  and  Miller  J.C. 
Critical  Detonation  Thickness 
  VaporDeposited    Pentaerythritol  Tetranitrate  PETN 
Films  17th  APS  Topical  Conference  on  Shock 
Compression  of  Condensed  Matter  Chicago  IL 
June 26  July 1 2011.
Knepper R. Marquez M.P. and Tappan 
A.S.  Effects  of  Confinement  on  Detonation 
Hexanitroazobenzene  Films  15th  International 
Detonation  Symposium  San  Francisco  CA  July 
Knepper R. Browning K. Wixom R.R. 
Tappan A.S. Rodriguez M.A. and  Alam  M.K. 
Microstructure  Evolution  during  Crystallization 
of  Vapor-Deposited  Hexanitroazobenzene  Films 
Propellants Explosives Pyrotechnics vol. 37 pp. 
Wixom  R.R.  Tappan  A.S.  Brundage 
A.L.  Knepper  R.  Ritchey  M.B.  Michael  J.R. 
Characterization  of  pore 
morphology  in  molecular  crystal  explosives  by 
focused  ion-beam  nanotomography  Journal  of 
Materials  Research  vol.  25  pp.  1362-1370  July 
Campbell  A.W.  and  Engelke  R.  The 
Diameter  Effect  in  High-Density  Heterogeneous 
Explosives  6th  Symposium  International  on 
Detonation  Coronado  CA  August  24-27  1976 
Alexander Dolgoborodov JIHT RAS Moscow
When you increase porosity of explosive films 
the  critical  thickness  decreases.  Do  you  know 
whether  it  is  possible  to  achieve a  detonation  at 
nano-dimensional  scale  with  a  higher  value  of 
microstructure  and  detonation  properties  towards 
improving  our  understanding  of  the  effects  of 
microstructure on detonation.
The  authors  wish  to  acknowledge  Michael  P. 
Marquez James Patrick Ball Jill C. Miller and M. 
Barry Ritchey for experimental support. Adrian L. 
Casias  Adrian  Wagner  and  Benjamin  J.  Hanks 
assisted with manufacturing deposition and testing 
Technology  Development  Program  supported  this 
work.  Sandia  National  Laboratories  is  a  multiprogram  laboratory  managed  and  operated  by 
Sandia Corporation a wholly owned subsidiary of 
Lockheed  Martin  Corporation 
Department of Energys National Nuclear Security 
contract  DE-AC0494AL85000.Short Duration Shock Initiation of Detonator Explosives 
Explosive Trains and Devices 
AWE Plc Aldermaston Reading Berkshire United Kingdom 
Abstract. Pentaerythritol Tetranitrate PETN Hexanitrostilbene HNS and PBX-9407 
RDX  cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine  were  initiated  using  polyimide  flyer  plates 
accelerated by the electrical explosive of a thin metal film with shock durations from 3 to 
13  nanoseconds  and  shock  pressures  from  7  to  16  GPa.  The  flyer  diameters  were  in 
excess of the critical diameter of the explosives allowing a one-dimensional treatment of 
Critical  energy  criteria  were  used  to  evaluate  the  results  with  values  for  the  critical 
fluence critical specific energy and critical intensity for each material determined. This 
allows for the efficient design of slapper detonators by providing a method to predict the 
threshold of a design prior to experimental validation. 
Slapper  detonators  use  the  explosion  of  a 
metallic bridge by the rapid deposition of electrical 
or  optical  energy  to  accelerate  a  thin  flyer  plate 
across  an  air  gap  into  a  high  density  secondary 
explosive pellet resulting in shock initiation of the 
explosive.  They  offer  performance  and  safety 
advantages over Exploding Bridgewire detonators. 
The shocks generated within the explosive are 
typically  of  insufficient  duration  to  allow  the 
rarefaction  waves  from  the  rear  or  the  sides    of 
the flyer plate interact with the reaction resulting 
in extended run distances. This is illustrated in Fig. 
1. To  develop  a  science-based  understanding  of
this short duration shock initiation it is necessary 
to determine the threshold pressure for a range of 
to  complete  before 
The  50  probability  of  initiation  thresholds 
Hexanitrostilbene  HNS  and  PBX-9407  were 
determined  using  electrically-accelerated  flyer 
the  critical  diameter  of 
plates  with  shock  durations  from  3 
nanoseconds  and  shock  pressures  from  7  to  16 
GPa. The flyer diameters 380 m were in excess 
approximately 250 m for HNS 1 200 to 300 m 
for PETN 2 and 300 m for PBX-9407 3. This 
ensured  that  the  initiation  was  not  limited  by  the 
initial  flyer  diameter  allowing  a  one-dimensional 
treatment of the initiation. 
The shock duration was controlled by varying 
the flyer plate thickness. For each flyer thickness 
the threshold flyer velocity was determined using 
Photonic Doppler Velocimetry. In some cases the 
shock pressure exceeded the detonation pressure of 
A critical energy criteria the James criterion 
was  used  to  evaluate  the  results  with  values  for 
the  critical  energy  fluence  and  critical  power 
fluence for each material determined. This allows 
for  the  efficient  design  of  slapper  detonators  by 
providing  a  method  to  predict  the  threshold  of  a 
design prior to experimental validation. 
approximated  as  the  shock  reflection  time  within 
 where  x  is  the  flyer  thickness  and  U  is  the 
shock velocity in the explosive.
Rarefaction from rear of flyer 
In  order  to  establish  detonation  an  energetic 
material  requires  a  stimulus  which  exceeds  a 
certain critical energy fluence Ec a function of the 
input  shock  pressure  P  shock  duration    shock 
velocity  U  and  solid  explosive  density  0 
traditionally  linked  by  the  relationship  developed 
by  Walker  and  Wasley 4 for  flat  plate  impacts 
onto energetic materials 
The James Criterion 5 is an extension of the 
original  Walker-Wasley  criterion.  It  possesses  all 
the  applicability  of  the  Walker-Wasley  criterion 
but  applies  to  a  wider  range  of  both  impactor 
shapes  and  energetic  materials.  The  James 
Criterion is given by 
Rarefaction from sides of flyer 
where  Ec  and  c  are  constants  for  a  given 
explosive. The specific energy  is given by  
with units of MJ.kg.-1 and E by 1 with units of 
MJ.m-2. The 50 probability for initiation is given 
by J1 with successful initiation occurring for J1 
and unsuccessful initiation occurring for J1.  
An  alternative  form  of  the  James  Criterion 
proposed by Welle et al 6 may be used with the 
specific  energy  replaced  by  flux  or  intensity 
given by     with units of GW.m-2 where u 
is the particle or material velocity 
where Ec and E are as previously defined and 
EA and c are constants for a given explosive. 
The Walker-Wasley James and Welle Criteria 
are applicable for one dimensional shocks only. 
Two  shock  parameters  must  be  known  to 
characterise  the  initiation  of  an  explosive  charge 
the shock pressure imparted to the explosive and 
the duration over which this pressure is sustained. 
The pressure can be calculated from the measured 
flyer  velocity.  The  pulse  duration  is  extremely 
difficult  to  measure  experimentally  due  to  its 
extreme  brevity.  Historically 
Fig. 1. Attenuation of shock by rarefaction waves 
Explosives Evaluated 
Several explosives all applicable to detonator 
applications were evaluated. Firstly a HNS 98 
wt.  Kel-F 2 wt. formulation with a specific 
surface  area  of  approximately  8  m2.g-1  7. 
Secondly  a  medium  surface  area  PETN  with  a 
specific  surface  area  of  approximately  0.8  m2.g-1 
7.  Thirdly  PBX-9407  94  wt.  RDX  6  wt. 
FPC-461.  These  first 
three  explosives  were 
supplied as pressed pellets by Teledyne Reynolds 
Tracey California USA. Fourthly a high surface 
area  PETN  with  a  specific  surface  area  of 
approximately  1.3  m2.g-1
.  Fifthly  a  medium 
surface area PETN with a specific surface area of 
approximately  0.7  m2.g-1.  Finally  a  fine  HNS 
with  a  specific  surface  area  of  13.9  m2.g- 
previously evaluated by the author with aluminium 
flyer plates 8 was tested with polyimide flyers to 
extend the existing data set. It should be noted that 
the  method  by  which  the  surface  area  was 
measured is not known in all cases.
Experimental Method 
The  explosives evaluated  were  pressed  into 
right circular cylinders to a density of 1.60 g.cm-3 
1.65 g.cm-3 for the 1.3 m2.g-1 surface area PETN 
evaluated. The cylinders varied in size from 3.429 
mm  diameter  by  1.27  mm  height  to  12.56  mm 
diameter by 5 mm height as indicated in Table 1.  
explosive  pellet  was  approximately  250  micron. 
The cable design is shown in Fig. 3. 
Table 1. Explosive pellet dimensions 
RISI HNS  1.60  0.01 
PBX-9407  1.60  0.01
Fine HNS  1.60  0.01 
The pellets were fixed to 10 mm diameter by 
5  mm  height  right  circular  windows  either 
polymethylmethacrylate 
fluoride  using  a  cyanoacrylate  adhesive  Loctite 
460.  The  lithium  fluoride  windows  were  ARcoated  for  a  wavelength  of  1550  nm  on  the  nonexplosive face and ground to a surface roughness 
of  approximately  5  microns  then  coated  with  50 
nm of aluminium on the face in contact with the 
The  pellet  and  window  assembly  was  then 
assembled into a fixture assembled from Thorlabs 
optomechanic  components  shown  in  Fig.  2.  A 
counterbored hole in the middle plate was used to 
locate the pellet and window assembly. 
Fig. 2. Experimental assembly 
Flexible  foil  slapper  detonator  cables  with  a 
380  micron  width  and  380  micron  length  bridge 
were  used  with  a  range  of  polyimide  flyer 
thickness. The initial spacing of the flyer from the 
Fig. 3. Flexible foil slapper detonator cable design 
The  slapper  cable  was  connected 
The explosive pellet to window interface was 
viewed  using  an  Oz  Optics  single  mode  fibre 
collimator  with  a  collimated  beam  diameter  of 
0.22 mm. The fibre collimator was connected to a 
Photonic Doppler Velocimeter PDV to record the 
motion of the explosive pellet to window interface. 
capacitor discharge firing unit via a flat conductor 
or stripline adapter cable. A Pearson 411 current 
monitor  was  connected  via  a  loop  in  the  stripline 
to record the current via a 40 dB attenuator. The 
firing  unit  had  a  capacitance  of  350  nF  and  was 
capable of being charged to voltages between 500 
and  5000  volts.  The  total  circuit  inductance  was 
An  AWE-designed  4  channel  opticallyupshifted  PDV  system  manufactured  by  NP 
Photonics was used with a probe laser power of 2 
watts  nominal  500  mW  per  channel  and  a 
reference laser power of 25 mW. The upshift was 
approximately 8 GHz. 
The PDV signal was converted to an electrical 
signal  by  Miteq  SCMR-100K20G  fibre  optic 
receivers  and  recorded  along  with  the  current 
monitor by a Tektronix DPO71604C oscilloscope 
with a bandwidth of 16 GHz and a sampling rate 
of 100x109 samplessecond.
A semi-analytic model 9 was used to predict 
the  threshold  capacitor  charge  voltage  for  each 
flyer thickness using the published critical fluence 
and  specific  energy  values  for  LX-16  10.  This 
informed  the  choice  of  starting  capacitor  charge 
voltage  for  each  flyer  thickness  minimising  the 
number of tests required. 
The  capacitor  charge  voltage  required  for  a 
50 probability of initiation was then determined 
for each flyer thickness and explosive using a 12 
shot  Neyer  d-optimal  11  series.  This  was 
sufficient  to  obtain  a  cross-over  a  failure  at  a 
voltage  higher  than  a  success  and  hence  an 
estimate of the standard deviation. 
The  flyer  velocity  as  a  function  of  charge 
then  determined  for  each  flyer 
thickness  using  PDV  to  allow  the  threshold 
capacitor  charge  voltage  to  be  translated  to  a 
threshold flyer velocity. 
The  PDV  data  was  analysed  using  SIRHEN 
12 with a 1024 time point 4096 frequency point 
Hann window and an overlap ratio of 4. 
Fig. 4. Example flyer velocity PDV trace. 
Fig. 5. Flyer velocity as a function of capacitor 
charge voltage for varying flyer thicknesses. Error 
Flyer Thickness Determination 
The initial flyer thickness was measured using 
a  digital  micrometer  with  a  resolution  of  1  m. 
However polyimide is highly ductile and the flyer 
thickness at the point of impact into the explosive 
is  not  well  understood.  During 
acceleration  and  subsequent  flight 
Flyer Characterisation 
Flyer Velocity Measurement 
The  flyer  velocity  histories  as  a  function  of 
capacitor  charge  voltage  were  measured  using 
PDV  with  the  explosive  pellet  replaced  by  a 
lithium  fluoride  window.  The  windows  were  25 
mm  diameter  2mm  thickness  with  a  2  wedge 
between  the  faces  and  an  anti-reflection  coating 
on the impact surface. 
An  example  result  is  shown  in  Fig.  4.  The 
flyer  velocity  history  was  integrated  with  respect 
to  time  to  determine  displacement.  The  impact 
velocity was calculated for a displacement of 0.24 
mm  the  initial  spacing  of  the  flyer  from  the 
explosive  pellet.  The  velocity  was  averaged  over 
10  velocitytime  points  to  reduce  variability  and 
the  standard  deviation  calculated  from  these  10 
points. The results are shown in Fig. 5. A linear fit 
was made to the data. The results for 1200 V were 
excluded from the fit as significant variability was 
seen  likely  due  to  the  proximity  to  the  threshold 
stretches  and  reduces  in  thickness.  The  flyer 
thickness  determines  the  duration  of  the  shock 
imparted to the explosive.  
To determine the flyer thickness at impact the 
windows. The motion of the flyer prior to impact 
and  the  subsequent  motion  of  the  combined  flyer 
and window interface was recorded using PDV. A 
one-dimensional  hydrocode  was  then  used  to 
simulate the impact. By comparison of the ratio of 
the  experimental  pulse  duration  to  the  simulated 
pulse  duration  calculated  using  the  initial  flyer 
thickness  the  flyer  thickness  at  impact  was 
estimated  by  scaling  the  initial  flyer  thickness  by 
this  ratio.  The  calculated  pulse  duration  was 
greater  than  the  measured  pulse  duration  due  to 
the reduction in thickness during acceleration and 
flight. This was observed for the 27.0 m and 39.0 
m flyer thicknesses. The measured pulse duration 
for the 16.1 m initial flyer thickness was greater 
than  the  calculated  duration.  It  is  believed  this  is 
due to the time resolution of the PDV analysis. As 
the ratio of inferred flyer thickness to initial flyer 
thickness  was  essentially  constant  for  the  other 
thicknesses 0.816 the inferred flyer thickness for 
the  16.1  m  flyer  thickness  was  calculated  using 
this  value.  The  inferred  flyer  thicknesses  were 
used  for  subsequent  calculations.  The  standard 
deviations  for  the  inferred  flyer  thickness  was 
taken from the standard deviation of the measured 
initial flyer thicknesses. 
Table 2. Characterisation of flyer thickness. Errors 
initiated  with  the  exception  of  PBX-9407.  This 
could not be initiated at capacitor charge voltages 
up  to  4000  V  the  maximum  capacitor  charge 
voltage  possible.  Larger  diameter  flyers  635  m 
were also used to eliminate the possibility that the 
flyers were below the critical diameter again with 
no success. It is likely that this is due to the limited 
pulse  duration  imparted  to  the  explosives  tested 
and that PBX-9407 has a longer run distance than 
the PETN and HNS materials tested here. Thicker 
flyers beyond those possible to use with this test 
method would likely result in initiation.  
The  threshold  capacitor  charge  voltages  are 
given in Table 3 and the threshold flyer velocities 
shown  in  Table  4.  Calculated  pressures  and 
durations  are  given  in  Table  5.  A  crossover  was 
not obtained for the fine HNS. 
Table 3. Threshold capacitor charge voltage 50 
probability of initiation. Errors shown are  1 . 
Table 4. Threshold flyer velocities 50 
probability of initiation. Errors shown are  1 . 
Table 5. Threshold shock pressures and durations 
50 probability of initiation. Errors shown are  
Analysis and Discussion 
There are pressure and duration thresholds for 
a  selection  of  comparable  materials 
literature.  Schwarz  13  evaluated  a  low  surface 
area  2.56  m2.g-1  HNS  hereby  referred  to  as 
coarse HNS using large 1 mm diameter 25-254 
m  thickness  flyers.  May  10  evaluated  LX-16 
94  PETN  6  FPC-461  at  1.7  g.cm-3
Parylene  C  flyers.  Damm  14  evaluated  a  HNS 
henceforth referred to as medium HNS similar to 
the RISI HNS with  Parylene C flyers. 
Modifications  were  made  to  the  literature 
data. May took the pulse duration to be the time at 
which  the  rarefaction  wave  from  the  rear  of  the 
flyer  arrived  at  the  flyerexplosive  interface.  This 
gives a pulse duration somewhat shorter than that 
given  by  equation  4.  For  the  analysis  presented 
here the pulse duration imparted to the LX-16 was 
calculated  using  equation 
measured flyer thicknesses to allow comparison to 
the  results  reported  here  and  other  historic  data. 
Schwarzs Kapton flyer thicknesses were scaled by 
the  same  ratio  0.816  as  measured  here  to 
account for the reduction in flyer thickness during 
The  pulse  duration    was  calculated  using 
equation 4 for the majority of cases. For some of 
the thicker flyers the pulse duration is limited by 
the  lateral  release  waves  from  the  edges  of  the 
flyer. In these cases where the flyer behaved as a 
rod  was calculated using the relationship derived 
by James 15 where D  is the flyer diameter and 
CHE the sound velocity in the explosive  
The Hugoniot parameters used in the analysis 
are  shown  in  Table  6.  The  Hugoniot  for  the  fine 
PETN  at  1.65  g.cm-3  was  approximated  by 
theoretical  maximum  density  TMD  Hugoniot 
data obtained from the literature 16 17. 
the  Snowplough  porosity  model 
Table 6. Hugoniot parameters 
The James criterion equation 2 was used to 
analyse each material. A least-squares fit was used 
to calculate Ec and c for each material. The results 
are shown in Fig. 6 for PETN and Fig. 7 for HNS. 
Two  materials  the  medium  PETN  and  the  RISI 
HNS showed unusual results with low thresholds 
for  the  thickest  31.9  m  flyers.  This  is  not 
believed  to  be  due  to  experimental  error  but  this 
cannot  be  excluded.  Values  of  Ec  and  c  were 
obtained for the medium PETN but a meaningful 
fit could not be made for the RISI HNS. 
Examination of Fig. 6 reveals some interesting 
trends.  All  types  of  PETN  have  a  very  similar 
critical specific energy given by the low pressure 
long  duration  shocks.  This  is  useful  for  safety 
assessments as the majority of unintended insults 
to  explosive  are  in  this  regime.  In  the  high 
pressure  short  duration  regime  clear  differences 
are seen. The RISI PETN and the medium PETN 
had  similar  critical 
surprising given that the densities were nominally 
identical  and  the  surface  area  was  very  similar. 
The fine PETN was tested at a higher density 1.65 
g.cm-3  compared  to  1.6  g.cm-3  and  accordingly
has  a  higher  critical  fluence  and  specific  energy.
LX-16 was somewhat more interesting. The higher 
density  of  LX-16  1.7  g.cm-3    and  the  use  of  a 
binder  would  be  expected  to  result  in  a  higher 
critical  fluence  and  specific  energy  than  all  other 
converse was seen with the critical fluence of LX16  the  lowest  of  all  PETN  types  tested.  The 
surface area and particle size distribution of LX-16 
is  not  known  so  it  is  not  possible  to  determine 
why LX-16 displays a greater sensitivity. 
types  discussed  here.  However 
The  results  for  HNS  are  shown  in  Fig.  7.  A 
different behaviour to PETN is observed. At high 
pressures  the  critical  fluence  is  proportional  to 
surface  area  with  higher  surface  HNS  types 
having  a  lower  critical  fluence  and  hence  greater 
sensitivity to high pressure short duration shocks. 
At  low  pressures  the  critical  specific  energy  is 
proportional  to  surface  area  with  lower  surface 
HNS types having a lower critical specific energy 
and hence greater sensitivity to low pressure long 
Fig. 7. Fluence vs. specific kinetic energy plot for 
various HNS types. Error bars are  1 . 
spots.  Proposed  hot 
Shock  initiation  of  heterogeneous  explosives 
such as PETN and HNS relies on the creation of 
localised areas of increased temperature known as 
mechanisms  include  compression  of  the  voids 
between particles collapse of the void resulting in 
jetting of the surrounding material or mechanical 
fracture of the particles. The temperature of the hot 
spots induces reaction in the surrounding material 
temperature  further.  As  the  reaction  grows  to 
detonation  these  hot  spots  grow  and  coalesce 
until  the  reaction  has  reached  a  steady-  state 
detonation.  The  rate  of  this  growth  is  dependent 
upon  the  particle  size  and  hence  surface  area 
small  particles  with  a  high  specific  surface  area 
will  react  faster  than  large  particles  with  a  low 
specific  surface  area.  For  a  given  shock  pressure 
releasing  energy  and 
Fig. 6. Fluence vs. specific kinetic energy plot for 
various PETN types. Error bars are  1 . 
Table 7. James values critical fluence Ec critical 
specific energy c critical intensity c fitting 
the  hot  spot  temperature  is  higher  for  large 
particles and hence large hot spots than for small 
particles with small hot spots. 
For  long  duration  shocks  large  particle  size 
materials  with  low  specific  surface  area  will  be 
more sensitive as the pressure required to attain a 
critical  temperature  is  lower.  However  for  short 
duration shocks the temperature is reduced by the 
rarefaction  waves  before  the  large  particles  are 
able  to  fully  burn  and  react.  Although  small 
particle  size  and  high  specific  surface  area 
materials require a higher shock pressure to attain 
a critical temperature the small particles are able 
to burn and fully react before the rarefaction waves 
reduce  the  temperature  and  quence  the  reaction. 
For short duration shock therefore small particles 
size materials are more sensitive. 
HNS  typically  has  a  lower  critical  fluence 
than PETN i.e. greater sensitivity to high pressure 
short  duration  shocks.  This  is  the  result  of  HNS 
having  a  much  greater  surface  area  than  PETN 
10  m2.g-1  compared  to  1  m2.g-1.  At  lower 
pressures  the  difference  is  less  significant  with 
only  the  higher  surface  area  HNS  types  having  a 
higher critical specific energy than PETN.  
The Welle criterion equation 3 was also used 
to  analyse  the  data.  The  values  of  Ec  calculated 
earlier were used and a least-squares fit then used 
to  determine  the  critical  intensity  c  and  the 
fitting parameter EA. 
The calculated critical values specific fluence Ec 
specific energy c specific intensity c fitting 
parameter EA are given in  
Table 7 for all materials tested and analysed. 
The  values  reported  for  LX-16  differ  from 
those  reported  by  May  10  due  to  the  different 
definition of pulse duration used.  
It  should  be  noted  that  some  of  these  values 
were  derived  from  experimental  results  over  a 
relatively  small  range  of  shock  pressures  and 
durations.  Care  should  be  taken  when  applying 
these  values  in  regimes  outside  of  those  tested 
here.  It  is  planned  to  extend  the  range  of  shock 
pressures  and  durations  tested  using  laser-driven 
aluminium flyers plates to achieve extremely high 
shock  pressures  and  thick  polyimide  electricallydriven flyer plates to achieve long shock durations.  
The  50  probability  of  initiation  thresholds 
for  Pentaerythritol  Tetranitrate 
Hexanitrostilbene  HNS  powders  of  varying 
surface  area  were  determined  using  electricallyaccelerated flyer plates with shock durations from 
3 to 13 nanoseconds and shock pressures from 7 to 
16  GPa.  These  pressures  and  durations  are 
representative of those found in slapper detonators.  
This  data  along  with  threshold  values  for 
other  PETN  and  HNS  powders  reported  in  the 
literature  was  analysed  using  the  Walker-Wasley 
James  and  Welle  critical  energy  criteria 
determine the critical energy fluence and intensity 
required for initiation. This provides a database for 
detonator explosives allowing for development of 
detonator designs and safety assessment. 
PETN was found to trend to a constant critical 
specific  energy  for  low  pressure  longer  duration 
shocks  whereas  the  critical  specific  energy  for 
HNS  was  dependant  on  surface  area  with  lower 
surface  area  HNS  having  a  lower  critical  specific 
energy.  For  high  pressure  short  duration  shocks 
the  converse  was  found  for  HNS  with  higher 
surface area HNS having a lower critical fluence. 
This  was  not  found  for  PETN  where  the  most 
sensitive PETN at low pressures was also the most 
sensitive at high pressures. 
The author would like to thank Jack Day Lee 
Webb  Paul  Collins  and  Scott  Aitken  AWE  for 
experimental  assistance  Rod  Drake  AWE  for 
technical discussion Amy Mitchell and Will Neal 
AWE  for  experimental  assistance  analysis  and 
error  determination  Matthew  Maisey  and  MaryAnn Maheswaren AWE for assistance with flyer 
thickness  determination  Jim  Varosh  Teledyne 
Reynolds  for  supply  of  explosive  pellets  Pete 
Williams and Jon Botting AWE for engineering Following Reaction Progress from Thermal Decomposition to Ignition and Internal 
Laura Smilowitz Bryan F. Henson George Rodriguez and Richard Sandberg 
 Matt Holmes Alan Novak Dave Oschwald Eva Baca  
Weapons Experiments 
Los Alamos National Lab Los Alamos NM 87545 
Abstract. This paper will discuss the experimental observation of  thermodynamic  state 
variables  during  the  thermal  decomposition  and  evolution  of  thermal  explosion  in 
energetic  materials.  We  will  discuss  the  continuous  measurement  of  these  observables 
across time scales bridging the pre-ignition thermal decomposition regime and the postignition  burn  propagation  regimes.  Techniques  for  measuring  temperature  density  and 
pressure  continuously  will  be  discussed  and  results  presented  for  thermal  explosions  in 
the HMX based formulation PBX-9501.  Comparisons between the observables and rates 
of  change  will  be  discussed.  These  observations  will  be  used  to  offer  a  definition  of 
ignition  which  distinguishes  between  the  slow  processes  of  thermal  decomposition  and 
heating and the switch to fast consumption of solid by internal burning. 
The  response  of  energetic  materials  to 
temperature occurs over time scales ranging from 
microseconds to hours. This represents a dynamic 
range  of  nearly  10  orders  of  magnitude  in  time 
making  energetic  materials  extremely  challenging 
to study both experimentally and computationally. 
Experimentally  following  observables  such  as 
microsecond  resolution  for  durations  of  hours  is 
not  typically  possible.  Current  treatments  cleave 
the problem into regimes with a slow pre-ignition 
regime lasting for hours and evolving on the time 
scale  of  seconds  and  then  a  fast  post-ignition 
regime lasting for hundreds of microseconds with 
the  order  of  microseconds. 
Computationally the same change in time scales is 
treated  by  handing  off  the  problem  between  preignition models and post-ignition burn propagation 
models  which  is  typically  a  pressure  dependent 
programmed burn. While considering the response 
in  the  different  time  regimes  which  evolve  at 
different  rates  is  a  logical  approach  the  material 
actually evolves continuously between the pre and 
post  ignition  regimes.  We  have  attempted  to 
and  provide  sufficient  heating  rates  to  accelerate 
the decomposition to generate a thermal explosion. 
The onset of this thermal explosion is often called 
ignition.    Although  the  word  ignition  is  used 
and distinguishing behavior pre- and post- ignition 
is not difficult the exact meaning of ignition is not 
well  agreed  upon  and  likely  depends  on  the 
observables  used  and  will  be  discussed  in  the 
sections below. Post-ignition burn propagation can 
occur  via  either  slow  conductive  propagation 
through the solid or faster convective propagation 
through the gas phase.   
propagation  occurs  on  the  time  scale  of  tens  of 
microseconds. A subsequent even faster regime of 
detonation  is  possible  if  confinement  conditions 
and  path  lengths  sufficient  for  the  deflagration  to 
detonation  trasnsition  DDT  are  present.  That 
regime is currently outside the scope of this work.  
Due  to  the  change  in  time  scales  from 
microseconds  to  hours  covering  the  multiple 
regimes  it  is  hard  to  follow  a  single  observable 
through the entire event. Our work has focused on 
developing diagnostics which can be monitored for 
hours  with  time  resolution  of  microseconds.  We 
have  applied  these  diagnostics  to  a  number  of 
HMX  based  formulations  and  have  temperature 
and  density  observables  which  are  continuously 
monitored  through  the  entire  evolution  of  a 
thermal explosion. In this paper we will show the 
continuous temperature density and pressure data 
sets  and  discuss  our  hypotheses 
mechanisms  of  time  scale  switches  from  pre-  to 
post-ignition regimes.  
Experimental Techniques and Results 
Radial Thermal Explosion Experiment 
explosion  experiment  have  been  previously 
published1  2.  This  is  our  standard  experiment 
configuration using a cylinder of explosive of  
diameter  and  1  height  encased  in  an  aluminum 
cylinder  which  is  held  together  with  either  steel 
bolts or a threaded endcap. The aluminum is then 
heated using resistive wire heaters. A schematic of 
the experiment is shown in  Fig. 2. The left panel 
shows the schematic of the cased experiment and 
the  right  shows  a  photograph  of  midplane 
Fig. 1 Schematic description of the evolution of 
a thermal explosion showing notionally the 
effect of temperature and pressure. 
thermodevelop  experimental  observables  of 
dynamic state variables which can be followed for 
durations  of  hours  with  ultimate  time  resolutions 
of microseconds. In this paper we will discuss the 
specifics of  the experimental  tools developed and 
show the results of the observation as the material 
decomposition  to  ignition  and  post-ignition  burn 
temperature  density  and 
pressure.  We  will  discuss  each  sequentially  and 
finally  compare  the  time  response  of  all  three  to 
thermal  decomposition  of  HMX 
based  formulations  is  typically  parsed  into  the 
slow  thermal  decomposition  the  evolution  of 
ignition  and  the  post-ignition  burn  propagation 
regimes as shown in Fig. 1 below. This is a very 
practical way to think about thermal explosions as 
the  time  scales  for  the  regimes  are  dramatically 
different and require different tools and techniques 
to  study  them.  Thermal  decomposition  can  occur 
temperatures  to  which  the  HMX  is  subjected.  If 
the  high  explosive  HE 
sufficiently  high  temperature  for  long  enough 
times exothermic decomposition can  be activated 
longer  depending  on 
temperature  exceeds 
temperature of 205 C is used. At this temperature 
the aluminum boundary is fixed at 205 C and the 
exothermic decomposition steps so that the hottest 
spot  in  the  material  moves  from  the  boundary 
towards the spot furthest from the metal boundary 
at the center of the HE cylinder. The regime where 
temperature is called the self-heating regime. The 
point  at  which  this  self-heating  rate  accelerates 
several hundred seconds before thermal explosion 
is  the  onset  of  the  thermal  runaway  regime.  The 
final  point  taken  before  the  sample  undergoes  a 
rapid thermal explosion is called the ignition point.  
The  same  data  can  be  plotted  on  a 
features leading to the thermal explosion. The log 
time  base  is  plotted  as  the  time  until  the  ignition 
event  as  show  in  Fig.  4.  The  final  point  on  the 
linear time scale in Fig. 3 defined as the ignition 
point  is  now  shown  to  have  significant  structure 
when  the  time  axis  is  drawn  using  the  log  time 
base in Fig. 4. The data in Fig. 4 are taken using 
fine  gauge  75  micron  type  K  thermocouples 
measured  with  microsecond  time  resolution  and 
with multimode fiber optics coupled to the central 
Fig. 2 Schematic of radial thermal explosion 
case and photograph of midplane 
thermocouple and fiber optic diagnostics. 
thermocouple and fiber optic diagnostics used in a 
particular experiment. 
thermocouples and broadband near IR pyrometry. 
3-5 The standard temperature trajectory used for 
a  thermal  explosion  experiment  of  PBX-9501  is 
shown  in  Fig.  3.  The  sample  is  heated  in  several 
steps with a hold point at 178 C to allow sample 
equilibration  after 
the  endothermic  beta-delta 
phase  transition  of  the  HMX.  A  final  hold 
Fig. 3 Temperature trajectory for radial thermal explosion experiment on PBX-9501. Colored lines are 
internal HE temperatures. Black shows aluminum boundary temperature. 
Fig. 4 Temperature data plotted on a logarithmic time scale. 
region  of  the  HE  and  measured  on  an  amplified 
InGaAs  photodiode  also  with  microsecond  time 
resolution.  The  structure  seen  in  the  logarithmic 
scale plot is reminiscent of the spatial structure of 
a  flame  front  above  a  regressing  surface  as 
observed by Beckstead. 6 The jump to 600-700 
K in the tens of millisecond regime is analogous to 
dark zone burning and the final jump to 1800 K in 
the  hundreds  of  microsecond  regime  is  similar  to 
the  bright  zone.  The  detailed  structure  of  the 
ignition  regime  is  sensitively  dependent  on  the 
distance between the midplane diagnostics and the 
ignition  volume.  We  have  found  the  ignition 
volume  position  to  be  very  sensitive  to  the 
boundary  conditions  of  the  experiment.  Ignition 
volume  size  and  location  are  observed  using 
radiography as discussed in the next section.  
We  have  developed 
radiographic  tools  to  follow  density  during  the 
evolution  of  thermal  explosions.  In  order  to 
observe  the  slow  evolution  of  density  during  the 
pre-ignition  thermal  decomposition  regime  we 
have  built  a  radiographic  capability  around 
continuous  microfocus  x-ray  sources  using  CCD 
based  cameras  to  record  images  on  the  1-10  Hz 
period.  The  microfocus  source  can  be  run 
continuously  for  many  hours  and  produces  very 
high  spatial  resolution  images  due  to  the  10-100 
micron x-ray spot size available from this type of 
source.  The  x-ray  radiographs  are  collected  as  xray  transmission  images  with  lower  transmission 
darker regions corresponding to higher density or 
longer  path  length  regions  of  the  sample.  The  xray transmission image is a two dimensional image 
of the areal density gcm2 of the sample which is 
the  path  integral  of  the  three  dimensional  sample 
density.  Because  we  know  the  path  length  the 
changes in x-ray transmission can be attributed to 
changes in material density along the line of sight. 
Images  are  presented  both  as  direct  transmission 
or as change in transmission where an image ratio 
is  made  by  dividing  an  image  by  an  image 
collected  earlier  in  time  in  order  to  match  the 
dynamic range of the change in transmission to the 
dynamic range of the data presentation color look 
up  table.  In  both  direct  transmission  and  change 
in  transmission  the  data  is  presented  with  white 
representing  higher  transmission  and  black  lower 
Figure  5  shows  the  direct  transmission 
and change in transmission of a PBX-9501 thermal 
explosion experiment in the axial view transverse 
to  the  symmetry  axis.  The  light  spot  above  the 
midplane  is  the  volume  where  solid  density  is 
being lost in the seconds leading up to the thermal 
explosion.  This  is  the  region  we  refer  to  as  the 
ignition  volume.  For  PBX-9501  the  ignition 
Fig. 6 InGaAs temperature trace and breakfoil 
record of thermal explosion.  
expansions of the different materials and through 
the  volume  expansion  of  the  beta-delta  phase 
transition in the HMX7 8. The extra volume at 
the  top  and  bottom  of  the  case  fills  in  when  the 
material  expands  at  the  phase  transition  and  the 
gap  between  the  two  pellets  at  the  midplane 
disappears  when  the  material  expands  and  the 
binder softens at elevated temperature. 
In order to measure the faster response in 
the  post-ignition  regime  a  pulsed  x-ray  source  is 
microfocus source is insufficient to allow imaging 
with sub-millisecond time resolution. We utilize a 
pulsed  x-ray  source  with  a  trigger  technique 
developed in our lab to enable us to turn on the xray  source  and  trigger  the  ultra-high  speed  video 
acquisition at the onset of the dynamic process in 
the HE. Figure 6 shows the internal measurement 
of temperature used to trigger the x-ray and video 
acquisition.  The  same  graph  shows  the  record  of 
an  external  break  foil  on  the  experiment  case 
which serves as a time record of the case coming 
apart late in the thermal explosion event. We have 
found  very  good  reproducibility  on  the  time 
between the steep rise in temperature and the break 
foil.  For  PBX-9501  radial 
experiments of the  by 1 size the time between 
these  two  signatures  is  on  the  order  of  60 
The  onset  of  the  rapid  temperature  rise 
time scale of microseconds is used to trigger the 
pulsed  x-ray  source  and  ultra-high  speed  video 
camera.  The  combination  of  source  flux  and 
detection sensitivity enables us to image with 5-7 
Fig. 5 transmission and change in 
transmission prior to ignition.  
volume  is  typically  a  clearly  defined  region  with 
diameter  approaching  2  mm  and  density  loss 
evolving over seconds to a final density change of 
approximately  8  which  is  equivalent  to  a 
complete loss of solid density in the 2 mm volume. 
The red vertical trace is the line profile across the 
sample  showing  the  transmission  change  at  the 
Changing  gas  confinement  conditions  for  the 
experiment  changes  the  appearance  but  not  the 
size  of  the  ignition  volume.  Additionally  the 
location of the ignition volume has been found to 
be sensitive to the boundary conditions and sample 
The  density  is  measured  continuously 
through  the  pre-ignition  thermal  decomposition 
including  measuring  case  and  HE 
the  coefficient  of 
Fig. 7 This series of images illustrate the convective internal burning exhibited by a sample of PBX 
9501 subjected to heating until ignition at 205 C.  The dynamic data are shown in direct x-ray 
transmission with increased transmission in the lighter regions of the image.  Ignition is observed to 
happen near the midplane of the cylinder with propagation to the case boundary and significant 
deformation at late times.  Each frame is collected with a 7 microsecond interframe time.  The velocity 
of burning in these experiments is a function of the gas phase pressure behind the burn front.  The 
collaborative experiments described above couple internal fiber based pressure measurements within 
these experiments to simultaneously measure pressure and rate of burning.  This image was obtained 
from a recent experiment where pressure data were obtained during burning.   
microsecond  interframe  times.  For  PBX-9501  7 
microsecond  interframe  time  is  chosen  based  on 
the  LANL  proton  radiography 
facility.9  10  Figure  7  shows 
transmission collected with this interframe time. 
We have made measurements of pressure 
using custom fiber Bragg gratings FBG. 11 12 
A FBG consists of a periodic variation in the index 
of refraction in the core of an optical fiber which 
acts  as  a  distributed  reflector.  13      The  light 
traveling  down  the  fiber  optic  is  reflected  back 
modulated index of refraction. Fiber Bragg grating 
sensors  have  predictable  thermal  and  mechanical 
response  properties.  14  15  Previously 
wavelength  shift  of  the  returning  light  spectrum 
has been studied as a function of temperature and 
applied pressure . 15 Under applied pressure the 
reflectance  spectrum  shifts 
wavelengths  and  in  elevated  temperature  the 
reflectance  spectrum  shifts  to  longer  wavelength. 
The  pressure  and  temperature  sensitivity  shifts  of 
Ge-doped fused silica FBG sensors are calculated 
For a pressure wave of 100 kbar a spectral shift of 
38 nm at O1550 nm to the blue in the return FBG 
spectrum is expected and a shift of 5 nm to the red 
is expected at T500 C. Therefore it is possible to 
simultaneously  measure  temperature  and  pressure 
from a FBG if wavelength selective binning of the 
return  light  spectrum  from  the  FBG  sensor  is 
Figure 8 shows a schematic for operation 
of the FBG sensor in these studies. Figure 9 shows 
a  selection  of  pressures  measured  using  FBG 
sensors  embedded  at  the  top  end  of  a  radial 
Fig. 8 Schematic of LANL Fiber Bragg 
Grating detonation wave velocity detection 
thermal explosion experiment with the experiment 
standing  vertically 
symmetry  axis  is  vertical.  The  data  from  4 
different  experiments  is  included  to  give  a  sense 
both of the rate of pressurization observed and the 
variability  in  pressure  measured  from  experiment 
Results and Discussion 
Comparison of Observables 
observables  continuously  across  the  slow  to  fast 
timescales is enabled by using a single observable 
T U or P and acquiring the data with different 
time  resolutions  over  the  different  regimes.  The 
quasistatic  pre-ignition  regime  data  is  collected 
Fig. 9 FBG measurement of pressure at 
endcap of radial thermal explosion 
experiments. Multiple experiments are shown 
to show variability of the measurement. 
for  thousands  of  seconds  with  second  resolution. 
The dynamic post-ignition regime data is collected 
with  microsecond  resolution  for  up  to  seconds. 
The  internal  temperature  diagnostics  are  used  to 
turn  on  the  collection  of  the  microsecond  time 
scale data at a time within the time window of the 
thermal explosion event.  
Comparing the time response for the fast 
observation  of  the  different  thermodynamic  state 
variables we see that all show what is essentially a 
switch in response rates between the quasistatic 
or  pre-ignition  regime  and  the  dynamic  postignition  regime.  The  pre-ignition  observables  are 
evolving at increasing rates up to 10s of degrees 
Fig. 10 Left panel shows linear time base for pre-ignition temperature and density. Right panel shows 
pre-ignition data on logarithmic time axis. 
Fig.  11  Logarithmic 
together pre- and post-ignition regimes. 
time  base  stitching 
per second temperature rise and density loss in the 
ignition  volume  over  10-20  seconds. 
However  on  the  sub-millisecond  time  scale  the 
rate  of  rise  is  essentially  flat  10  C  second 
implies 0.01 C mS. However there is a sudden 
switch in the rate of change of all the observables 
in  the  final  100-200  microseconds  leading  to  the 
thermal explosion event.  Figures 10 and 11 show 
the comparison of temperature and density plotted 
linearly  and  logarithmically  to  demonstrate  the 
switch in time scales.  
We have followed  the evolution of three 
thermodynamic  state  variables  from  the  preignition  thermal  decomposition  through  to  the 
post-ignition  burn  propagation  regime  in  PBX9501  thermal  explosions.  We  have  measured 
temperature  density  and  pressure  continuously 
across the time scales covering a duration of nearly 
104 seconds with time resolutions of 10-6 seconds. 
All three variables show a switch in time scales in 
the  final  hundreds  of  microseconds  leading  to 
thermal  explosion.  Work  is  underway  to  identify 
the mechanism for this switch in order to provide 
the framework for a computational treatment with 
a  consistent  treatment  of  the  material  across  the 
entire range of behavior. 
This  research  was  supported  by  Science 
Campaign  II  and  VI  the  NSRD  Program  and 
the  LDRD  program  administered  by  Los  Alamos 
National Laboratory. We would also like to thank 
members of the WX-4 Group and NS Tech LAO 
for  help  in  preparing  the  FBG  sensors  and  B. 
Marshall  and  B.  LaLone  from  NS  Tech  STL  for 
helpful conversations. A Grit-Surface Interaction Model for Frictional Ignition of PBX 9501
Jake A. Gunderson Eric Heatwole Peter Dickson and Gary R. Parker
WX-6 Explosive Applications and Special Projects Los Alamos National Laboratory
Inadvertent initiation of high explosives HE through an impact-friction event is a major
safety concern among the explosives community. It has been demonstrated that during
a frictional heating event the maximum temperature achieved is bounded by the melting
points of the interacting surfaces. Furthermore well known theories of thermal criticality
predict that in order for an ignition event to occur there exists not only a critical temperature but also a critical hot spot size that is geometry dependent.
To better understand the frictional heating process in such an event one and two dimensional thermal kinetic time-to-ignition models were developed using the commercially
available nite element modeling package COMSOL. This modeling work coincided with
drop-skid experiments being conducted at Los Alamos National Laboratory and supported
those experiments. These models include a well-developed four-step Arrhenius model for
PBX 9501 that has previously shown good agreement with friction impact studies and various grit-inclusion radii to simulate typical grit sizes of concern 10  1000m.
The one dimensional model followed the assumption of temperature bounding by the melting points of commonly available grit and surface materials plastics aluminum steel and
silica. In this model the boundary condition was forced very near the melting point of the
given material. Thermal gradients were then allowed to relax and ignition time was noted.
A total of 50 simulation runs were completed in order to encompass the chosen parameter
space. While this model provided good agreement with previous work it became obvious
that it was unable to predict some of the behavior observed in the coincident drop-skid
To better simulate that behavior a more complex two dimensional model was developed.
This model captured the frictional heating between a single grit particle silica and various
surfaces of interest. In this model several assumptions are made including total conversion
of drop velocity to sliding velocity no mechanical deformation of any material involved
and a constant coefcient of kinetic friction. While the time-to-ignition results were of
the same order as those of the one dimensional model an increase in predicted ignition
time was noted in all cases. This increase was in better agreement with the drop-skid
experiments. Maximum temperature achieved in the simulation prior to ignition tended to
be far below the melting point of the surface material. The model results indicate that timeto-ignition for an impact-friction event is heavily dependent upon the thermal diffusivity of
the materials involved this conclusion is supported by experimental observation.
ior of HE during a grit-involved friction-ignition
In all cases the thermal decomposition of
PBX 9501 is described in terms of a 4-step reduced reversible kinetics scheme that has previously shown good agreement with experiment in
many time regimes4 5 while using observed temperature dependent thermal properties of the HE.
This model is primarily thermal in nature and it
should be noted that mechanical effects such as grit
shearing and substrate gouging are neglected. The
initial 1-dimensional models were used to investigate the effects of grit melting point on the evolution
of hot spots. The 2-dimensional models are primarily concerned with the effects of thermal diffusivity
and grit particle size. All models are implemented
using the commercially available COMSOL Multiphysics modeling package.
It is well accepted that grit particles with a melting point below that of the critical temperature of
an HE do not cause signicant sensitization during a friction-impact event1. Furthermore FrankKamenetskii F-K Theory show that thermal ignition events are not strictly temperature dependent
and that a hot spot must be of a critical size in order to cause ignition. To fully explore the effect of
melting point and hot spot size a simple 1D radially
symmetric model was devised using the thermal kinetic scheme above. It should be noted that these
simulations were completed before any experimental work had begun.
The model setup was an inert spherical inclusion with the thermal properties of fused silica
  2.203gcc Cp  0.703kJkg  K k 
1.3Wm  K surrounded by a shell of simulated
PBX 9501 of 10 times the inclusion radius. The
inclusion radius varied between model runs to simulate typical grit sizes of concern 10  1000m.
Grit sizes of less than 10m were excluded due to
being sub HMX grain scale in PBX 9501. Mesh
density was held constant at 10 cells per m . At
time 0 the inclusion was given an initial temperature
approximating potential grit and substrate melting
points outlined in Table 1. Thermal gradients were
then allowed to relax and ignition time was noted.
Although the typical duration of a frictional heating event has been observed to be on the order of
Essentially all models are wrong but some are
Inadvertent ignition due to mechanical insult of
HE is the cause of many human-threatening accident scenarios. A plurality of the documented HE
accidents involving mechanical insult have either
been shown to be or are suspected to be the result of
friction ignition. Understanding this ignition mechanism as well as means to mitigate or remove it
is of keen interest to the explosives community especially those who are involved in assembly andor
disassembly of large consolidated PBX charges.
Much work has been done in this area and it
has been shown that friction heating is temperature limited by the melting point of the interacting surfaces1 2. Thus a frictional event between
a PBX and another pristine surface results in maximum temperatures too low to cause meaningful ignition of the explosive2. Subsequently it has been
shown that the involvement of grit contaminates
with signicantly higher melting temperatures than
PBX can and do lead to ignition of the HE3. The grit
contaminant provides an energy localization mechanism that can then lead to the evolution of hot spot
ignition. The behavior leading to this evolution is
yet to be fully understood.
While there are several test protocols designed
to measure the drop sensitivity of HE the classic
impact test involves dropping a hemisphere of explosive machined or pressed onto a 45surface
of interest and assessing the violence of outcome.
A more in depth series of experiments were proposed and have been partially completed at the Los
Alamos National Laboratory LANL to investigate
the inuence of grit particle on the ignition of HE
during such an event. Prior to the commencement
of these tests several computer models focused on
the grit particle-surface interaction were developed
to aid in dening the test matrix as well as elucidating the experimental results.
Two model dimensionalities were chosen to investigate different aspects of the ignition behav
604
Table 1. Simulated initial temperatures used to approximate common material melting points
Representative Material
Simulated Melting Temperature C
Table 2. Summary of minimum inclusion radii for
simulated ignition to occur.
Initial Temperature C
no ignition for any radius
1ms lack of ignition within 30 seconds was considered a no-go. This longer time frame was included
in order to better scope the heating event and any
post event ignition behavior. A total of 50 simulation runs were completed in order to encompass the
chosen parameter space.
1-Dimensional Model Results
For initial temperatures of 350 C and below no
ignition was seen within the time allotted for any inclusion size. At higher temperatures the minimum
inclusion size for ignition is shown in Table 2. For a
given initial temperature time to ignition was seen
to decrease with larger inclusion sizes while asymptotically approaching a minimum. This behavior is
summarized in Figure 1. The minimum simulated
inclusion size for 1200 C was 10m and exhibited ignition behavior. For 600 C and 800 C the
simulated no-go radii were 125m and 10m respectively.
The 2D model consisted of an axisymmetric cut
of a single grit particel embedded in HE while in
contact with an impact surface. See Figure 2. The
grit radius was varied between 25m  1000m
with the radius of the HE and surface scaled to
10 times that of the grit. All exterior boundary
conditions are approximated as innite and no me
605
Fig. 1. Time to ignition versus inclusion radius for
given initial inclusion temperature. No-Go Radii
are denoted by Xs with drop lines.
chanical deformation gaps cracks or melting is
considered. The contact boundary between the
grit and substrate was held at constant power density determined from calculation of frictional heat
potential6 7 see Eq. 1.
where   7.86  106P a
The sliding velocity  above was simulated as
4.5ms 6ms or 9ms which correspond to nal freefall velocity from 1mS 2m and 4m respectively. This also assumes total conversion of fall
velocity to sliding velocity. These conditions are
deliberately severe to represent a worst-case. The
thermal properties used for the grit as well as the
chosen impact surface materials are shown in Table
2-Dimensional Model Results
Figures 3 4 and 5 illustrate the time to ignition
for several grit particle sizes given the sliding velocity. No-go radii are marked with Xs and one and
ve milliseconds are marked for clarity. Aluminum
is omitted from Figures 3 and 4 as no ignition was
observed in these cases.
During the simulations it was noted that the predicted temperature of the interface between the grit
and sliding surface was well below that of the melt
Table 3. Thermal properties of materials used in 2D model.
g  cm3 CpkJ  kg1  K1
Fig. 2. Representative 2D model image. Colors are
as follows red and pink  PBX 9501 blue  substrate light blue  grit
ing temperature of either the notable exception being aluminum. The maximum temperature reached
across all simulations involving each material is
shown in Table 4 along with representative melting
temperatures for each material.
Experimental Guidance Provided by Modeling
The 1-dimensional simulation results indicated
that the potential for an impact friction ignition
event of PBX 9501 can be reduced by careful consideration of working surfaces. No ignition was
simulated for several orders of time greater than the
bounce time in the case of low melting point substrates 350 C. Even at the higher melting point
of 600 C the minimum time to ignition seen is on
the order of tens of ms which could allow for the
Fig. 3. Time to ignition for 4.5ms sliding velocity
corresponding to a 1 meter drop.
Fig. 4. Time to ignition for 6ms sliding velocity
corresponding to a 2 meter drop.
sample to rebound and heating to cease prior to potential ignition.
While the results of the 1-dimensional simulation
were intuitively pleasing and simple experimental
observations of drops onto sanded glass quickly diverged from prediction. In several cases no reaction
was observed from signicant drop heights involving much larger particle sizes than predicted. Conversely reactions from very low drop heights with
small grit sizes were observed. These experimental
results were sharp reminders of the 1-dimensional
models inability to investigate the effect of drop
height and prompted the development of the more
complex 2-dimensional model.
The 2-dimensional model was developed as the
experimental work continued. Early simulation results using a glass surface more closely matched reactions observed during testing. As simulation work
continued on to other materials two important trends
1. Melting temperature of the grit and surface were
never reached in any case and in most cases the
maximum temperature of the interface was far below either melting point.
2. Probability of reaction and time to ignition was
strongly correlated to the thermal diffusivity of the
At this point that in part because of these simulation results sapphire was chosen as an additional
test surface. Sapphire provides a similar thermal
diffusivity to steel but allows for more direct observation due to its optical transparency. All simulations were completed prior to the completion of
Experimental Setup and Observations
Experiment consisted of a 15 foot long rigid arm
pendulum with a Delrin cradle that accepted a  0.5
pound PBX 9501 charge. This pendulum could
achieve drops of up to 30 ft onto a 45 surface. The
surfaces relevant to this work were glass aluminum
steel and sapphire. For each drop grit particles of
different sizes were lightly adhered to each surface.
For further details regarding the experimental setup
see the work by Dickson Parker Holmes and Heatwole published in these proceedings.
Fig. 5. Time to ignition for 9ms sliding velocity
corresponding to a 4 meter drop.
Table 4. Maximum temperature of grit reached in
simulation along with representative melt temperatures of materials.
simulated max C melt C
Fig. 6. Observed reactions from glancing impacts
Observed results from each of the sanded surfaces can be seen in Figures 6 7 8 and 9.
these gures the markers indicate median particle size within the range of particles sorted by the
sieves with range is indicated by the horizontal bars.
The vertical bars visible when not obscured by the
markers indicate 1 error in measurement of drop
Evaluation of Model Predictions and Conclusions
The 1-dimensional model while easily implemented
is incapable of providing any further
insights beyond what a simple implementation
of Frank-Kamenetskii Theory would.
The 2dimensional model shows a high propensity of reaction on glass substrate along with the strong dependence on drop height seen in experimental evidence.
The steel and aluminum experiments exhibit the
most interesting behavior as those material are of
intermediate hardness and thus are least representative of the simulation setup which did not allow any
material deformation. An example of the gouging
that was prevalent during the steel and aluminum
experiment can be seen the micrograph shown in
Fig. 7. Observed reactions from glancing impacts
Fig. 8. Observed reactions from glancing impacts
4.03.53.02.52.01.51.00.50.0Free Fall Drop Height m10008006004002000Grit Diameter mSanded glass No reaction Ignition sites Ignition ame in cracks4.03.53.02.52.01.51.00.50.0Free Fall Drop Height m10008006004002000Grit Diameter mSanded aluminum No reaction Ignition sites4.03.53.02.52.01.51.00.50.0Free Fall Drop Height m10008006004002000Grit Diameter mSanded steel No reaction Ignition sites Ignition ame in cracks Ignition reballFig. 10. Low and high magnication micrographs
of a steel surface that was covered in sand during
a glancing impact. Note the plentiful gouge marks.
The blue arrow indicates the direction of travel of
particle effects are also currently being investigated.
It is safe then to conclude that any model that seeks
to truly predict ignition during a friction-impact
event must include material hardness mechanical
deformation and multi-grit particle interactions.
Fig. 9. Observed reactions from glancing impactsRamp loading of Kel-F 81 and EDC 37 observed with embedded particle velocity
M. Goff M. J. Burns C. Stennett A. Roberts P. Taylor and G. J. Appleby-Thomas
Cranfield University Shrivenham Swindon SN6 8LA UK
AWE Aldermaston Reading RG7 4PR UK
Abstract. A novel ceramic ramp loading system has been developed that is compatible
with the gas gun plate impact and magnetic particle velocity gauge techniques. The use of
a graded areal density loading technique involving rapid prototyped ceramic enables a
wide parameter space to be efficiently explored. Ramp loadings of varying duration have
been produced in Kel-F 81 polymer and hydrocode modelling of the system is successful
in replicating key features. Initial experiments with the pressed HMX based explosive
EDC 37 have shown some evidence that ramp loadingfinite compression rates have a
desensitising effect on the explosives run to detonation response in comparison with thin
and sustained shock pulses of similar input particle velocity.
This paper building on a previous study1
the development of a ramp loading
technique that can be used to impart controlled
ramp loading paths in inert or energetic targets.
The aim of this body of work is to develop a
methodology that can be used to study the effects
of ramp loading on run to detonation in explosive
Experimental constraints dictated that
technique used had to be compatible with both the
gas gun plate impact2 and embedded particle
velocity PV gauge techniques34. This meant that
several approaches previously reported in the
literature using metallic materials56 were unable to
be employed7. Therefore a novel method was
developed based on the technique devised by
Winter et al.8 of using a flyer with a graded areal
density. The main development is that whereas
Winter used metal flyers this variant uses flyers
comprised of a rapid prototyped alumina ceramic.
The primary diagnostic used in this work is a
version of the embedded particle velocity gauge
based upon that developed at LANL.349. This
elegant technique uses a gauge package consisting
of multiple metallic elements in conjunction with a
known flat magnetic field. Careful metrology and
induction enable the particle velocity experienced
by the gauge elements to be calculated from a
is assumed the gauge
elements move with the surrounding material and
do not significantly disrupt the 1-D flow of the
combined with Faradays
heterogeneous explosives can be desensitised by
ramp loadings relative to sustained pulses. This
has been observed in the pressed HMX based
explosive PBX-94041011 by Setchell.
Experimental constraints dictated that
ramp loading method selected had to use nonconductive materials
requirement was also imposed by the velocity
capabilities of the gas guns that were available.
This meant that alumina ceramic was selected as a
producing solid flyers with a density gradient
instance Spark Plasma Sintering12.
protracted development route given the limited inhouse capabilities in this area. Other techniques
such as the use of reverse-elastic moduli materials
e.g. fuzed silica 13 offered a limited parameter
space for adjusting ramp variables therefore the
graded areal density method was selected. The
gradient and duration of the ramp loading can be
controlled by alteration of the spike and buffer
parameters. Flyers are produced using industrial
stereolithography in this study thus enabling a
rapid progression from theoretical design to
experimental results.
this approach is that
The graded areal density system comprises of
a system consisting of a flyer plate and a matching
buffer plate. The flyer plate has a graded areal
density i.e. it has a surface consisting of multiple
raised structures. The technique as used here uses
spikes comprised of square pyramids. This shape
was chosen because it enables a high packing
density of structures to be formed although other
geometries such as conical structures are feasible.
The buffer plate is made of similar material and is
placed in contact with the front face of the target.
The flyer is then launched at the target as per the
standard gas gun plate impact technique. Upon
impact the spikes form multiple wavelets in the
constructively interfere
which then enters the target. The target
undergoes a complex loading path which can best
be described as a ramp loading which comprises
features of both shockless compression and a
A schematic of the system used is shown in
Fig. 1 and example parameters are given for a
typical experimental setup.
A  Side length of bottom of spikessquare
pyramid structures 3 mm
B  Side length of top of spikes 0.3 mm
C  Height of spikes 2 mm
D  Distance between base of spikes 0 mm
E  Impact velocity 0.940 mms
F  Thickness of buffer plate 4 mm
G- Thickness of base of flyer 5 mm
H Magnetic field 189.6  0.3 mT
I  Target dimensions nominal. 50.8 mm x
23 mm 29 mm for experiments with deep
Fig. 1. Schematic of graded areal density system
with sample parameters.
The properties of the wavefront produced in
the target are controlled by alternation of the spike
and buffer parameters on an iterative basis
supported by hydrocode modelling.
A range of flyer systems have been tested on
inert Kel-F 81 PCTFE polymer 2.14 gcc targets.
Variations on spike height 1  10 mm packing
density buffer thickness and spike shape have
been investigated. A small number of experiments
on EDC 37 1.84 gcc PBX 91 HMX 1
nitrocellulose 8 K10 targets have also been
undertaken with an extensive set of experiments
planned. Experiments were carried out using the
50 mm bore single stage light gas gun at Cranfield
The PV gauges used were approximately 90
m thick and were of a copper and polyimide
construction with 9 elements and 3 shock trackers.
In some experiments a surface mounted stirrup
gauge of similar construction was also used. The
Modelling Methodology and Results
The experimental results from the Kel-F 81
simulations created using ANSYS Autodyn 14.5
17. These simulations were carried out to assess if
the loading experienced by the gauge elements was
1-D and to observe the influence of release effects
over experimental timescales. Given that PV gauge
elements are of a finite length a 3-D loading over
the gauge length would have the potential to cause
inaccuracies in the velocity calculated.
Smooth Particle Hydrodynamics SPH was
utilised as initial Lagrangian modelling suffered
issues relating to mesh deformation caused by the
the spikes. The material and mesh
parameters used are detailed in Table 1. Due to the
nature of the graded areal density flyers 3-D
modelling techniques had to be employed. This
necessitated the use of a representative geometry
in order to facilitate the simulations. Fig. 3 shows
the modelled geometry with respect
represented a portion of the target in the X-Y plane
with the Z-axis being the axis of impact. This
representation was chosen so that the axis of X-Y
symmetry in the model was positioned on the edge
of the diagnostic region in the experimental target.
Thus if the virtual gauge points at similar z-axis
positions in the modelled region record a 1-D
wavefront it can be posited that with regards to
the X-Y plane the loading of the gauge elements
can be considered one-dimensional. The Z-axis
was preserved so that the variation of the loading
with depth could be directly compared with
experimental results. Fig. 4 shows the results from
several arrays of virtual gauge points positioned to
simulate a finite length particle velocity gauge
element. The loading observed is comparable for
all virtual gauges in the X-Y plane except those
nearest the edge of the representative geometry
this likely due to edge release effects that would
not be seen in the experimental diagnostic region.
experimental gauge elements are experiencing a
loading that is effectively 1-D. The loading can be
seen to vary with depth this is discussed in the
magnetic field was provided by NdFeB rare earth
magnets and was measured to be 189.60.3 mT15.
The ceramic flyers were constructed using a
ceramic stereolithography technique 3D-CSL by
Tech Assessment and Transfer Inc. MD USA 16.
This technique uses an additive manufacturing
process with a sintering step to produce fully dense
flyers are shown in Fig. 2.
Hugoniot and Johnson-Holmquist parameters is
although the material has similar density 3.753.80
conventional ballistic ceramics its tensile strength
is much weaker. Somewhat counter-intuitively
complex shapes exhibit an excellent match to
computer generated designs but simpler parts such
as thick 10 mm discs exhibit z-axis cracks and
aberrations that have complicated characterization.
Any non-planarity in the base of the flyer discs
used has been compensated for with a levelling
epoxy layer however this is more difficult to do
for buffer discs or characterization targets. For this
reason the buffer discs are now constructed of
conventional ceramic tiles Alotec 98 - CeramTec
conventional ceramic of similar density was used
for the simulations reported here.
Fig. 2. A 48 mm diameter by 5 mm thick flyer
disc with a surface texture consisting of A 1 mm
and B 2 mm high square pyramids
geometry. Modelled region shown off centre
in red with ochre region representing X-Y
Fig. 4. Comparison of selected particle velocities
recorded at virtual gauge points for the geometry
shown in Fig. 3  using the 2 mm spike height
system detailed in Fig. 1.
Experimental Results
Table 1. Autodyn parameters
Experimental particle velocity histories for a
number of experiments are shown below. The
particle velocities are calculated from recorded
Fig. 5 shows a comparison of 5 mm 2 mm
with different values of C in Fig. 1 and 1 mm
spike height systems for a Kel-F target. The 5 mm
system has not yet been applied to explosive
targets as it is unlikely to produce an energetic
reaction within experimental constraints. As can
be seen a wide variety of
produced these can further be altered by varying
the thickness of the buffer plate used. For the 1
mm and 2 mm systems it can seen that the loading
has transitioned from an initial ramp to a steep
shock by 8 mm depth whereas for the 5 mm
system this has not occurred. By optimization of
controlled. The peak particle velocities seen for all
systems are near identical within the expected
variation caused by a slightly varying inter-shot
impact velocity although the loadings wave
velocities vary by a greater extent.
modelling results indicate and oscillations seen in
the computer simulation are not present or are not
observed in the PV gauge results.
Fig. 6 Comparison of selected experimental and
modelling dashed data for 2 mm spike height
flyer system Impact in Kel-F was 947 ms-1 and
equivalent to 5.6 GPa if a solid ceramic flyer
were used. Trace labels indicate the distance of
the gauge element relative to the targetbuffer
interface mm and the wave velocity of the
initial and shock portions of the loading. Note
only odd numbered gauges shown for clarity.
Figs. 7 and 8 show the results of two similar
experiments using the 2 mm spike height system
on EDC 37. The two experiments utilised gauges
arrays placed at different depths in order to fully
observe any run to detonation processes. In Fig.
7 the traces exhibit a two or three part structure
to that seen in the inert experiment.
Differences can be seen between the loading
observed in inert Kel-F 81 target and the EDC 37
target. The EDC 37 traces exhibit a much slower
initial rise than the inert traces due to the differing
microstructure. Wave velocity analysis shows that
the initial slower loading is gradually overtaken by
a second faster shock wave which itself exhibits a
velocity more typical for the peak particle velocity
seen. In this case no reactive growth was seen over
the gauge elements and no conclusive evidence of
detonation was recorded.
Fig. 8 shows the results of the experiment
with the gauges mounted deeper into the target In
this case the initial two part loading structure can
again be seen but it is less pronounced and the
Fig. 5. Comparison of 1 2 and 5 mm spike height
systems with 4 mm thick buffers. Experimental
data for 940 ms-1 impacts into Kel-F shown.
Selected experimental results are presented for
1 mm and 2 mm spike height geometries see Fig.
1 for impacts with Kel-F and EDC 37 targets.
Additionally hydrocode simulation results are
shown for Kel-F impacts. Shock tracker results are
not shown as they were found not to function
correctly under ramp loadings. In general good
seen between experimental and
modelled results for the inert experiments. The key
deviations are an over-prediction of particle
velocity which is partially attributed to harmonic
oscillations that are not seen in the experimental
Fig. 6 shows results for a 2 mm spike height
system impacting Kel-F. A smooth ramp loading
or compaction wave can be observed in the
shallower gauges transitioning to a conventional
shock loading after 6 mm depth. Two distinct
wave velocities are seen. The initial time of arrival
at the shallower gauges manifests a wave velocity
of 1.93 mms and this is overtaken by a second
loading visible as a particle velocity gradient
change which displays features resembling a
conventional shock front
suggests that the initial loading is controlled by the
spikes which then transitions
dominated by the effect of the solid base. Peak
particle velocities are broadly similar over the
observed material and are 80 of what would be
impact using similar
materialsvelocities. It can be observed that release
to prelude the formation of a
sustained shock. As mentioned previously the
observed particle velocity is
initial lower speed loading is overtaken by the time
a depth of 10.5 mm is reached. Evidence of
reactive growth can be seen after 5 s although
evidence of detonation was inconclusive. The
ramp loading in this case is not optimised
sufficiently to produce an approximation of a
sustained plateau in the target so comparison to
data for sustained shocks would be misleading.
Previously published EDC 37 data shows that for a
0.2 s thin pulse of similar peak particle velocity
some energetic growth would be expected to be
observed approx. 8 mm depth or 1.8 s after pulse
input22 with an eventual detonation resulting.
Fig. 7. Experimental data for 2 mm spike height
flyer system 933 ms-1 impact
equivalent to 5.9 GPa if a solid ceramic flyer
were used. Trace labels indicate the distance of
the gauge element relative to the targetbuffer
interface mm and the wave velocity of the
initial and steep portions of the loading.
were used. Trace labels indicate the distance of
the gauge element relative to the targetbuffer
interface mm and the wave velocity of the
initial and shock portions of the loading.
Fig. 9 show the results of an experiment using
a variant on the 2 mm spike height system with
EDC 37. The thickness of the base was increased
to 10 mm parameter G in Fig. 1 to improve the
length of the sustained portion of the loading
produced approx. 1.5 s. The results are very
similar to those presented in Fig. 8 the increased
observed by the stirrup gauge is much closer is
form to a sustained pulse with a ramping leading
edge. Evidence of reactive growth can be seen
after 5 s and growth occurs slightly earlier than
for the flyer with a 5 mm base likely to be due to
the maintained pressure of the sustained region
of the input pulse. Evidence of detonation was
inconclusive. Previously published EDC 37 data
shows that for a 2 s sustained pulse of similar
peak particle velocity and duration of plateau some
energetic growth would be
observed at a depth of approx. 6 mm or 1.6 s
leading to an eventual
Fig. 9. Experimental data for 2 mm spike height
flyer system with 10 mm base 920 ms-1 impact
in EDC 37 equivalent to 5.9 GPa if a solid
ceramic flyer were used. Trace labels indicate
the distance of the gauge element relative to the
interface mm and the wave
velocity of the initial and shock portions of the
Fig. 8. Experimental data for 2 mm spike height
flyer system 920 ms-1 impact
equivalent to 5.9 GPa if a solid ceramic flyer
subdued when compared to
previously published thin pulse experiments using
similar input pulse peak particle velocities and
durations21. Post shot debris was inconclusive as to
whether detonation or deflagration occurred.
Fig. 10 shows the results of a 1 mm spike
height system parameter C in Fig. 1. A smooth
ramp loading can be observed in the shallower
transitioning to a conventional shock
loading at a depth of 2 mm. The gradient of the
rise increases more rapidly than for the 2 mm spike
height gauge results Fig. 6. Again two distinct
velocity regions are observed with the loadings
merging almost immediately. As with the 2 mm
spike height system oscillations in the modelling
results are not seen experimentally. The slight
decrease in peak particle velocity which can be in
the deeper gauges may indicate that the buffer
thickness is not optimised.
Fig. 11. Experimental data for 1 mm spike height
equivalent to 6.1 GPa if a solid ceramic flyer
were used. Trace labels indicate the distance of
the gauge element relative to the targetbuffer
interface mm and the wave velocity of the
initial and steep portions of the loading.
A novel ceramic ramp gas gun ramp loading
system has been developed
generating a wide range of ramp loadings that
exhibit features of both shockless compression and
sustained shocks. Optimisation of the technique to
the ramp and sustained
portions of the loading is currently proceeding on
an iterative basis. Hydrocode modelling of the
technique when applied to inert polymer targets is
capable of matching gross features in particular
the ramping portion of the loading. Additional
characterization work is required to fully model
the rapid prototype material.
EDC 37 displays a differing inert response to
ramp loadings then the Kel-F 81 polymer of
similar impedance. The overall structure of the
loading is similar with a clear two part structure to
the loading but the period of initial slow particle
velocity rise is much more pronounced in the
explosive. This is likely to due differences in the
Fig. 10. Comparison of selected experimental
solid and simulation dashed data for 1 mm
spike height flyer system Impact in Kel-F was
977 ms-1 and equivalent to 5.7 GPa if a solid
ceramic flyer were used. Trace labels indicate the
distance of the gauge element relative to the
velocity of the initial and shock portions of the
Fig. 11 shows the results of a 1 mm spike
height system impacting an EDC 37 target. As
with the 2 mm spike height system in Figs. 7 8
and 9 differences can be seen between the loading
observed in the inert Kel-F 81 target and the EDC
37 target before any energetic growth occurs.
Again these are likely due to the mechanical
response of the target. There is some reactive
growth evident the 7 and 8 mm depth elements
show an increased particle velocity that resembles
energetic growth before release occurs no increase
in shock speed is observed.
mechanical response of the material due to the
presence of a crystalbinder microstructure.
Experimental results suggest that inputting a
ramp loading into EDC 37 targets delays energetic
growth in comparison to thinsustained pulse
shocks of a similar initial target particle velocity
and period of peak shock amplitude. Further
experimental work with repositioned gauge arrays
is necessary to observe the run to detonation
process and thus quantify the effect of the different
This work was carried out in support of an ISP
Imperial College London UK funded PhD.Overcoming LX-17 Failure Diameter Size by High Pressure Shock Initiation using  
                                  Ultra Fast Thin Small Diameter Flyer Plates 
Craig M. Tarver John S. Christensen Kevin J. McMullen and Steven K. Chidester 
Defense Technologies Engineering Division and Energetic Materials Center 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 945550 
Abstract.  The  shock  initiation  of  a  condensed  phase  explosive  by  a  detonatorbooster 
system is often limited by its unconfined failure diameter below which a self-sustaining 
detonation cannot propagate. Very thin small diameter flyer plates driven to extremely 
high velocities have recently been shown to have the capability to initiate relatively shock 
sensitive solid explosives at diameters considerably smaller than their failure diameters. 
In this paper Kapton flyers with diameters as small as 5 mm are used to shock initiate the 
insensitive  high  explosive  LX-17  92.5  TATB    7.5  Kel-F  binder  which  has  an 
unconfined failure diameter of 11  12 mm.  Flyer velocities that impart shock pressures 
far in excess of the LX-17 von Neumann spike pressure are required. Measured threshold 
flyer velocities of Kapton flyers of various diameters and thicknesses that shock initiate 
LX-17  at  25C  75C  150C  and  250C  LX-17  are  reported.    The  LX-17  Ignition  and 
Growth  model  is  used  to  simulate  this  two-dimensional  process  in  which  diverging 
detonation wave development is hindered by both rear and side rarefaction waves.  
The  insensitive  high  explosive  IHE  LX-17 
92.5 TATB  7.5 Kel-F by weight has slower 
reaction kinetics than conventional explosives. The 
resulting 400 ns detonation reaction time duration 
creates a 3 mm detonation reaction zone length a 
curved  shock  front  and  an  unconfined  failure 
diameter  of  approximately  11  to  12  mm  1.  For 
some applications shock initiation of LX-17 over 
a  smaller  diameter  is  desired.    Recently  it  has 
been  demonstrated  for  several  shock  sensitive 
small  diameter  plastic  or 
aluminium  flyer  plates  accelerated  to  very  high 
velocities by rapid electrical energy deposition can 
diameters  much  less  than  the  explosives  failure 
diameter  2-4.    LX-10  95  HMX    5  Viton 
initiate  detonation  at 
binder  was  shock  initiated  by  1  mm  diameter 
Kapton  flyers  with  velocities  of  4.3  kms  even 
though LX-10s failure diameter is 1.5 - 2 mm 3.  
Melt  cast  Composition  B  which  has  a  failure 
diameter of about 4.3 mm was initiated by 2 mm 
diameter Kapton flyers of various thicknesses 4.  
Two-dimensional  Ignition  and  Growth  reactive 
flow modeling of these LX-10 and Composition B 
experiments  showed  that  the  initial  overdriven 
shock  wave  had  to  initiate  the  impacted  region 
before  the  rarefaction  wave  from  the  rear  of  the 
flyer  arrived  to  decrease  the  shock  pressure  and 
temperature  and  quench  the  reaction  24.    Then 
the  detonation  wave  had  to  grow  outward  to 
approximately  the  explosives  failure  diameter 
before the rarefaction waves from the sides of the 
explosive  charge  could  lower  the  reaction  rates. 
Either rarefaction process or a combination of both 
in  unreacted  LX-17.    Shock  pulse  durations  are 
less  than  the  400  ns  LX-17  detonation  reaction 
time.  The  measured  threshold  flyer  velocities  for 
ambient  temperature  LX-17  shock  to  detonation 
transition  are  listed  in  Table  3  by  Kapton  flyer 
diameter  and  thickness.    In  some  cases  only  one 
experiment  was  fired  but  for  most  combinations 
of flyer diameter and thickness at least one failure 
to initiate and one detonation wave were obtained.  
Previously measured and calculated thresholds for 
25.4  mm  diameter  Mylar  flyers  6  with  all  five 
thicknesses are included.  Also listed in Table 3 for 
ease  of  comparison  are 
twodimensional  flyer  velocity  thresholds  using  the 
Ignition  and  Growth  parameters 
initiation  lower  shock  pressures  and 
pulses or for detonation high shock pressures and 
short pulse durations. 
Reactive Flow Modeling 
The Ignition and Growth reactive flow model 
1  uses  two  JWL  EOSs  in  the  temperature 
p  AeR1V  BeR2V CV T V 1
where  p  is  pressure  V  is  relative  volume  T  is 
temperature  is the Gruneisen coefficient Cv is 
the average heat capacity and A B R1 and R2 are 
constants. The reaction rate equation is 
can cause detonation failure.  In this study of 25C 
75C  and  150C  and  250C  LX-17  threshold 
measured for a wide variety of Kapton flyers with 
diameters  ranging  from  5 
thicknesses  ranging  from  0.0508  to  1.27  mm.  
Threshold  flyer  velocities  ranged  from  3  to  10 
kms  producing  pressures  from  13  to  80  GPa.  
Pulse duration times ranged from 4 to 380 ns. 
Experimental Results 
The  experimental  details  are  discussed  in  a 
companion  paper  by  Christensen  and  McMullen 
5.  For the flyer velocity range of 3 to 8 kms the 
shock  pressures  in  LX-17  calculated  using  a 
Kapton Gruneisen equation of state EOS and the 
unreacted  Jones-Wilkins-Lee  JWL  LX-17  EOS 
are listed in Table 1.  The calculated shock pulse 
duration  times  for  the  five  Kapton  thicknesses  at 
various flyer velocities are listed in Table 2. Since 
the measured von Neumann spike pressure for LX17  is  about  33.5  GPa  and  the  Chapman-Jouguet 
C-J pressure is about 27 GPa 1 flyer velocities 
exceeding 5 kms create detonation-level pressures  
Table  1.  Calculated  LX-17  shock  pressures  for 
Kapton  flyer  velocities  assuming  a  linear  Kapton 
Gruneisen  EOS  01.414  gcm3  C2.741  kms 
s1.410.76 and the unreacted JWL in Table 4 
Table 2. Calculated shock pulse durations for five 
Kapton thicknesses impacting at threshold velocity 
Thicknessmm  Velocitykms  Durationns 
where  F  is  fraction  reacted  t  is  time  in  s    is  
current density o is initial density p is pressure in 
Mbars and I G1 G2 a b c d e g x y and z are 
constants.  Vandersall  et  al.  78  used  the  same 
LX-17 Ignition and Growth detonation parameters. 
Honodel  et  al.  9  measured  the  LX-17 
threshold  velocities 
thicknesses with 25.4 mm diameters listed in Table 
3.  A different slope in the threshold flyer velocity 
versus  flyer thickness  curve  occurred  at  about 5  
Table 3. Experimental and calculated Kapton and Mylar flyer velocities for ambient LX-17 
a. Only one experiment  Detonation at 7.5 kms  
threshold based on 6 mm and 8 mm data 
b. Only one experiment  Detonation at 7.0 kms  
threshold based on 25.4 mm diameter data 
c. Only one experiment  Detonation at 7.6 kms 
threshold based on 25.4 mm diameter data  
d. Only one experiment  Detonation at 4.125 kms 
threshold based on 15 mm diameter data 
e. Used d  0.667 or Figmax  0.09 with 
Table 5. T025C LX-17 shock initiation numbers 
Initial density o 1.905 gcm3 
To   298K  Eo  0.064 
Another  factor  is  that  the  failure  diameter  of 
LX-17  is  11  -  12  mm  and  the  largest  diameter 
flyers are only 25.4 mm.  At this diameter LX-17 
detonation waves have considerable curvature and 
must be modeled as two-dimensional waves  10.  
All  of  the  threshold  velocity  calculations  in  this 
paper are two dimensional because side rarefaction 
waves  influence  the  reaction  rates  in  all  the 
experiments listed in Table 3.  The 15 mm and 25.4 
mm  diameter  LX-17  experiments  are  larger  than 
the  11    12  mm  failure  diameter  so 
successfully initiated detonation waves do not have 
to grow radially outward to reach failure diameter.  
Successfully initiated detonations created by flyers 
with diameters from 5 to 10 mm do have to grow 
radially  to  continue  to  propagate.    The  LX-17 
shock  initiation  parameters  do  yield  reasonable 
detonation reaction zone lengths of 2  3 mm but 
the  rates  are  not  tuned  to  failure  diameter  corner 
turning  and  other  detailed  properties  of  curved 
kms. Similar rapid increases in threshold velocity 
at small flyer thicknesses were measured for other 
TATB  formulations  9.  In  1D  modeling  of  this 
data the LX-17 shock initiation parameters which 
had  been  normalized  to  other  shock  initiation 
experimental  data  overestimated  the  threshold 
velocities for the two thinnest flyers 6. As shown 
in  Table  1  these  flyer  velocities  imparted  shock 
pressures  equal  to  or  greater  than  those  in  LX-17 
detonation  waves.   The  shock  pulse  durations  for 
the  0.0508  and  0.127  mm  thick  Kapton  flyers  in 
Table  2  are  less  than  detonation  reaction  times. 
Thus  this  thin  pulse  shock  initiation  process  has 
similar reaction rates to those for detonation waves.  
Thus  it  is  reasonable  to  use  the  25C  LX-17 
detonation  Ignition  and  Growth  parameters  listed 
in  Table  4  to  model  the  high  flyer  velocity  thin 
pulse threshold velocities.  For thicker flyer plates 
that  initiate  LX-17  at  lower  pressures  the  shock 
initiation parameters listed in Table 5 are used. 
Table 4. T025C LX-17 detonation parameters 
Initial density o 1.905 gcm3 
detonation waves 1112.  Thus it is reasonable to 
model  all  of  the  higher  pressure  shock  initiation 
experiments at 10 mm diameter and below with the 
LX-17  detonation  parameters  especially  for  the 
thinnest Kapton flyer plates. 
Comparisons  of  Experiments  and  Calculations 
for Ambient Temperature LX-17 
The  measured  and  calculated 
velocities  are  compared  in  Table  3.    Three  mm 
diameter  Kapton  flyers  did  not  shock  initiate  LX17 
experimentally or calculationally. While extremely 
high  shock  pressures  did  cause  LX-17  to  initially 
rapidly  react  completely  these  reactive  waves 
could not grow radially fast enough to reach the 11 
  12  mm  diameter  before  edge  rarefaction  waves 
reached  the  center  of  the  charge  and  caused 
reaction  failure.    When  driven  by  fast  Kapton 
flyers  5  mm  diameter  LX-17  cylinders  were 
detonated.  Successful initiation of LX-17 cylinders 
with diameters about half of the steady state failure 
diameter is consistent with previous work on LX10  and  Composition  B  34.    The  experimental 
threshold  velocities  were  determined  closely  for 
most of the Kapton flyers of various diameters and 
thicknesses.    For those  flyers  which had  only  one 
experiment  fired  their  threshold  velocities  were 
estimated  based  on  the  threshold  velocity  ranges 
determined  for  similar  flyers.      The  older  Mylar 
flyer  experimental  data  for  five  thicknesses  with 
its  Gruneisen  EOS 
25.4  mm  diameters  and 
completeness.    Mylar  has  a  slightly  lower  density 
and  lower  shock  impedance  than  Kapton  so  the 
shock pressures generated in LX-17 are lower and 
thus the Mylar threshold velocities are higher than 
those  for  Kapton  flyers.    Figure  1  compares  the 
experimental  and  calculated  threshold  velocities 
versus thickness for the 25.4 mm diameter Kapton 
and  Mylar  flyers.    Figure  2  shows  all  of  the 
experimental  Kapton  flyer  threshold  velocities 
versus thickness for the various diameters. 
All  of  the  experimental  data  was  consistent 
with  the  pattern  that  thinner  flyers  and  smaller 
diameter  flyers  require  higher  velocities  to  cause 
shock initiation.  The LX-17 Ignition and Growth 
calculated  threshold  velocities  agree  well  overall 
the  experimental  measurements. 
dimensional calculations using the shock initiation 
reaction rate parameters accurately  predict  the 10  
15 and   25.4 mm   diameter   thicker   Kapton  and 
Flyer diameter  25.4 mm
 Kapton calculations
Flyer thickness - mm
Figure 1. Experimental and 2D calculated threshold 
velocities for 25.4 mm diameter Kapton and Mylar 
flyers of various thicknesses. 
Figure  2.  Experimental  Kapton  threshold  velocity 
versus flyer thickness for various flyer diameters. 
Mylar  flyer  data.    The  LX-17  detonation  reaction 
rate  parameters  calculate  most  of  thin  and  small 
diameter flyer threshold velocities  very well.  For 
the very thin 0.0508 and 0.127 mm thick flyers the 
calculated  threshold  velocities  are  higher  than 
measured  unless  the  exponent  d  is  decreased 
slightly from 0.866 to 0.667 or the Figmax parameter 
is  increased  from  0.02  to  0.09  while  using  d   
0.866  in  Eq.  2.  This  causes  more  early  reaction 
during  the  4  and  20  ns  pulse  durations.    The 
calculated threshold velocities using d  0.667 for 
the 0.0508 and 0.127 mm thick flyers are listed in 
Table  3.    All  of  the  calculated  Kapton  flyer 
threshold velocities are compared to the measured 
velocities are open symbols with lines and are the 
same  shape  and  color  as  the  solid  experimental 
values.  Overall the agreement with experiment is 
very good in both the lower shock pressures longer 
pulse duration shock initiation and the higher shock 
pressures shorter pulse detonation-like regimes. 
Comparisons  of  Experiments  and  Calculations 
for Heated LX-17 Heated 
Threshold flyer  velocity  measurements  were  
Figure  3.  Experimental  and  calculated  threshold 
velocities  for  LX-17  detonation  versus  flyer 
thickness for all Kapton flyer diameters. 
three  Kapton  diameters 
made for  unconfined LX-17  at  75C  150C  and 
thicknesses 7 mm diameter by 0.254 mm thick 10 
mm  diameter  by  0.508  mm  thick  and  25.4  mm 
diameter  by  0.254  mm  thick.    Table  6  lists  the 
measured threshold velocities for these nine flyers. 
At  higher  initial  temperatures  the  initial  densities 
decrease  and  reaction  rates  increase.    Thus  the 
failure  diameter  of  LX-17  decreases.    The  failure 
diameters at 75C 150C and 250C of LX-17 can 
be  estimated  from  the  measurements  of  failure 
diameters 13 and failure thicknesses in the prism 
test  14  for  heated  PBX  9502  95  TATB  5 
Kel-F binder.  The failure diameter of PBX 9502 
at  75C  is  5.7  -  6  mm  12  and  the  prism  failure 
thicknesses  which  are  approximately  half  of  the 
failure  diameters  at  150C  and  250C  are 
approximately  2.5  mm  and  2.0  mm  respectively 
13.    Garcia  and  Tarver  15  modeled  these  3D 
PBX  9502  tests  with  Ignition  and  Growth  rates 
similar  to  those  for  LX-17.    At  25C  the  failure 
diameter of PBX 9502 is 7.5  8 mm 12 and the 
LX-17  failure  diameter  is  11    12  mm.    Using  a 
similar ratio the estimated failure diameters of LX17 at 75C 150C and 250C are 8.5 mm 7 mm 
and 6 mm respectively.  This is consistent with the 
7 mm diameter data in Table 6 which shows that 
the  150C  and  250C  LX-17  cylinders  initiate  at 
Kapton flyer velocities below 4 kms indicating a 
shock  initiation  type  process  at  a  diameter  above 
the failure diameter while the 75C charges require 
flyer  velocities  close  to  6  kms  indicating  a 
detonation-like process that had to grow outward to 
reach the estimated 8.5 mm failure diameter. 
More experimental and reactive flow modeling 
work is available for TATB-based PBXs at 250C 
than at 75C or 150C.  Thus the new Kapton flyer 
data for 250C LX-17 was modeled.  The sustained 
shock  pulse  shock  initiation  of  250C  LX-17  has 
been  studied  using  embedded  manganin  gauges 
16.  Unconfined LX-17 at 250C is considerably 
more  shock  sensitive  than  at  25C  but  aluminum 
and  steel  confinement  has  a  large  effect  on  the 
shock  sensitivity  of  250C  LX-17  16.  Two 
unconfined 250C density measurements have been 
reported  517  and  they  are  both  about  1.70 
gcm3.  Whether this large density decrease causes 
a  large  in  the  change  in  the  porosity  or  is  mainly 
due to expansion of the TATB structure is an  open   
Table 7. T0250C LX-17 shock initiation numbers 
Initial density o  1.70 gcm3 
To   523K  Eo  0.058 
Table  8.  Calculated  Kapton 
velocities for 250C LX-17 
Table  6.  Experimental  Kapton  threshold  flyer 
velocities for 75C 150C and 250C LX-17 
question 17. An increase in porosity would imply 
compression.  All  of  the  reaction  rates  involved  in 
shock  initiation  are  faster  at  250C  than  lower 
temperatures.  Table 7 lists the Ignition and Growth 
shock initiation parameters for 250C LX-17 used 
in  this  paper.    They  are  similar  to  those  used 
previously  for  sustained  shock  initiation  1618. 
The G1 and the G2 coefficients are both twice that 
of 25C LX-17. The critical compression a in Eq. 
2  for  ignition  is  decreased  from  0.22  at  25C  to 
0.10 for 250C LX-17 because its shock initiation 
begins at approximately 2.5 GPa rather than the 6.5 
GPa measured for 25C LX-17 16.  
the  comparison  of 
Using  the  Ignition  and  Growth  parameters 
listed in Table 7 the three 250C Kapton threshold 
velocity data sets were modeled in two-dimensions.  
Table  8  lists  the  resulting  calculated  threshold 
velocities for detonation of 250C LX-17.  Figure 4 
calculated  threshold  velocities  for  250C  LX-17.  
The  agreement  with 
velocities listed in Table 5 is reasonable but more 
experimental  data  and  reactive  flow  modeling  are 
required  to  better  understand  the  short  pulse 
initiation at LX-17 at various initial temperatures. 
and  target  geometries.    An  accurate  reactive  flow 
model  is  essential  for  designing  highly  reliable 
detonatorbooster  systems  and  for  reducing  the 
amount  of  experimental  testing  of  those  systems.  
Besides  predictions  of  the  threshold  velocities  for 
initiation  the  Ignition  and  Growth  model  also 
predicts the run distances to detonation required for 
the buildup from shock initiation to self-sustaining 
detonation  as  function  of  shock  pressure  and 
duration  3.    The  run  distances  to  detonation  for 
short pulse duration shock initiation have long been 
known  to  be  several  times  longer  than  those  for 
sustained shock pulses at the same pressures 19.  
An  analytical  critical  energy  criterion  5  cannot 
predict run distances to detonation and could yield 
incorrect predictions of detonation versus failure in 
phenomenon  is  the  shock  initiation  of  ultrafine 
TATB by various lengths of LX-16 96 PETN 4 
  FPC  461  3.    The  short  pulse  duration  shock 
initiation at small diameters of less shock sensitive 
explosives  such  as  Composition  B  and  the  IHEs 
LX-17 and PBX 9502 is even more complex and 
requires  very  accurate  multidimensional  reactive 
The effect of higher initial temperatures of the 
threshold velocities for unconfined LX-17 charges 
was  studied  experimentally  and  computationally 
for  three  flyer  diameters  and  thicknesses.    Heavy 
confinement  has  been  shown  to  decrease  the 
thermal  expansion  of  heated  LX-17  charges.  The 
resulting  higher  LX-17  densities  increase  the  run 
distances to detonation for shock initiation 1618. 
Therefore  heavily  confined  heated  LX-17  charges 
are likely to be more difficult to initiate with short 
duration shock pulses than unconfined ones.  This 
and other effects such as the effects of lower initial 
temperatures and different initial densities on short 
shock  pulse  duration  initiation  of  LX-17  needs  to 
be investigated in future research.  Comparison of Shock Initiation Threshold Criteria for Projectiles with Flat Impact 
AWE Aldermaston Reading Berkshire RG7 4PR UK 
Abstract.  Empirical  shock  initiation  criteria  are  useful  for  fast  assessments  of  high 
explosive  HE  vulnerability  to  projectile  attack.  This  paper  gives  a  brief  historical 
perspective  to  the  various  criteria  that have  been  used  over the  years.  The most  useful 
types of criteria are those that can predict initiation thresholds for a range of both 1D and 
2D  projectile  geometries  using  shock  sensitivity  coefficients  that  have  been  obtained 
from a restricted number of experimental datasets for a given HE. The paper focuses on 
three empirical models that satisfy this requirement. The assumptions behind the models 
are explored and compared to experimental results theoretical analysis and simulations 
using a reactive burn model embedded in a hydrocode. Two of the models require fewer 
initial  data  than  the  third  and  it  will  be  argued  that  of  those  two  one  of  the  models 
provides a better match to the various independent observations and consequently gives a 
firmer foundation for possible future expansions of its predictive capability. 
Empirical  shock  initiation  criteria  are  useful 
for  fast  assessments  of  high  explosive  HE 
vulnerability  to  projectile  attack. The most  useful 
types of criteria are those that can predict initiation 
thresholds  for  a  range  of  projectile  geometries 
using shock sensitivity coefficients that have been 
obtained from a restricted number of experimental 
datasets  for  a  given  HE.  In  order  to  do  this  a 
criterion  needs  to  calculate  some  measure  of  the 
impact  energy  that  is  deposited  in  the  explosive 
and  have  a  term  usually  involving  time  that 
couples the projectile geometry to the attenuation 
empirical  models  that  satisfy  these  requirements. 
The  model  developed  by  Moulard1  a  method 
pioneered  by  Ramsay2  and  recently  updated  by 
Haskins  and  Cook3  hereafter  referred  to  as  the 
this  energy.  This  paper  discusses 
RHC Criterion and the so-called James Criterion 
developed  over  a number  of  years  by  the  present 
three  models  will  be 
experimental data and theoretical analysis as well 
to  results  from  a  reactive  burn  model 
CREST67.  From  these  comparisons  it  will  be 
argued that the James Criterion needs fewer initial 
data than Moulard and provides a better match to 
independent  observations 
The Empirical Models 
Historical Criteria 
There are a wide variety  of empirical criteria 
relating to  the  prediction  of  or  at  least  the  fit  to 
Two  major  problems  were  found  with  the 
Walker-Wasley  criterion.  The  first  was  that  it 
could  be  shown  experimentally12  that  the  model 
failed  to  provide  a  good  fit  to  thresholds  from  a 
variety  of  explosives  over  a  sufficiently  wide 
impact  range.  The  second  was  that  if  the  shock 
duration definition was applied to projectiles such 
as flat-nosed rods the value of Ec was a factor of 
about three greater than for thin large area flyers 
impacting into the same explosive4.  
One  other  historically  important  criterion 
needs  to  be  discussed  before  moving  on  to  more 
complete methods of describing the threshold. The 
model that became known as the Held Criterion13
was  tailored  to  2D  projectiles  and  assumed  that 
the initiation threshold could be described by 
where v is the impact velocity of the projectile and 
D is the projectile diameter. Kc is a constant for a 
given  explosive.  Held  used  this  criterion  to  fit 
thresholds  obtained  by  shaped  charge 
although it should be noted that the same criterion 
was being used at least ten years before his paper 
to describe the thresholds of flat nosed rods14.  
the shock initiation threshold. Possibly  one of the 
oldest  is  the  assumption  that  the  threshold  is  a 
function  of  Pn  utilised  in  Reference  8.  This 
criterion  is  usually  applied  to  one  dimensional 
projectiles  flyers  and  here  P  is  the  shock 
pressure  in  the  explosive  while    is  the  shock 
duration  i.e.  the  shock  reverberation  time  in  the 
flyer. For many explosives n is found to be about 
A  refinement  of  this  criterion  was  produced 
by  Walker  and  Wasley9  in  the  1960s.  Using 
experimental  flyer  data  generated  by  Gittings10
they deduced that the threshold was best described 
by  an  energy-per-unit-area  Ec.  Ec  was  assumed 
constant for a given explosive with large values of 
Ec  being  associated  with  an  insensitivity  of  the 
explosive  to  shock.  Ec  can  be  expressed  as  the 
work  done  per  unit  area  on  the  explosiveflyer 
interface during the duration of the pulse i.e. 
where P and  are as defined above while u is the 
particle  velocity  within  the  shocked  explosive 
The  shock  duration  was  defined  as  the  time 
taken  for  the  shock  to  be  transmitted  to  the  rear 
free-surface of the flyer and return as a rarefaction 
to  the  flyerHE  interface.  This  was  approximated 
Here s is the thickness of the flyer while Wp is the 
shock  velocity  in  the  flyer  calculated  from  the 
flyer  Hugoniot  using  an  impedance  mismatch 
technique e.g. see Appendix in Reference 11. In 
fact equation 2 gives a slightly longer time than 
is defined above in terms of wave propagation as 
the head of the rarefaction which bounds the nondivergent  shock  and  hence  the  parameter  values 
used  in  1  and  2  arrives  slightly  ahead  of  . 
However 2 is widely used and not thought to be 
seriously  in  error  when  the  other  approximations 
accounting for the reaction growth are considered. 
the  criterion  e.g. 
A number of problems beset this criterion. Kc
depends  not  only  on  the  explosive  but  on  such 
factors as the geometry of the projectiles striking 
surface the projectile material and the presence of 
any  barriers  between  the  projectile  and  the  HE. 
Also because Kc is not an intrinsic measure of the 
explosives  shock  sensitivity  it  could  not  be 
applied to 1D impacts.  
This  last  point  sums  up  the  major  pitfall 
associated  with these  criteria.  To  have  any  wider 
validity Ec Kc etc. need to be independent of the 
projectile  that  is  creating  the  shock  in  the  HE. 
Without this they all have to be recalibrated every 
time  the  projectile  is  changed.  However  if  a 
model  can  be  constructed 
coefficients  depend  only  upon  the  explosive 
then one set of experiments can be used to find the 
coefficients and thereafter at least in principle the 
model can be used to predict the threshold for any 
type  of  impact  into  that  particular  explosive.  The 
following discusses the attempts to construct such 
Projectile Free Models 
There  have  been  at  least  three  attempts  to 
construct a projectile-free model to describe the 
shock  initiation  threshold.  In  all  of  them  the 
energy  supplied  to  the  HE  has  been  described  in 
terms  of  the  shock  strength  generated  within  the 
explosive i.e. the impact velocity of the projectile 
has been converted to HE shock parameters via the 
impedance  mismatch  technique  and  a  knowledge 
of the projectile and HE non-reactive Hugoniots10. 
This  removes  the  necessity  of  recalibrating  the 
coefficients when parameters such as the projectile 
The  major  hurdle  that  is  left  and  which  the 
three  models  attempt  to  overcome  in  different 
ways is adjusting the definition of the time term in 
order  to  make  1D  and  2D  projectiles  utilise  the 
same  coefficient  values  when  attacking  the  same 
Moulard1  postulated 
critical  area  a  for  flat-nosed  cylindrical  rod 
impacts and by extension the concept could also 
be  applied  to  other  2D  projectile  cross-sections.  
For the HE to initiate the shock at a given impact 
velocity had to cover an area equal to or greater 
than  a.  If  it  covered  less  than  this  area  then  no 
initiation  could  occur.  At  the  experimentally 
determined  threshold  velocity  for  a  rod  Moulard 
assumed that there exists the relationship 
where  R  is  the  initial  radius  of  the  rod  r  is  the 
radius  of  the  critical  area  a   r2  cp  is  the 
sound  velocity  in  the  shocked  projectile  see 
Appendix  in  Reference  5  for  the  calculation  of 
sound speeds in shocked materials and  is time at 
the  1D flyer  threshold  for  the  same  explosive.  It 
would be expected that r decreases as the impact 
velocity increases and cp depends upon the shock 
pressure. The Ec term equation 1 is utilised in 
this  model  and  as  in  the  Walker  and  Wasley 
to  be  experimentally 
determined  by  flyer  impacts  which  define  the 
initiation threshold. The value of  for the flyer is 
then given by equations 1 and 2. Moulard also 
found  from  experiments  on  rods  that  in  order  to 
make  a  correspond  to  the  value  of    needed  to 
give the same value of Ec as the flyer a could be 
where    and  2  are  constants  for  a  given 
after  some  substitution  and  manipulation  of  this 
expression  with  equations  1  and  5 
threshold value of the cylindrical rod radius is 
those  parameters  which  are 
calculated  by  the  impedance  mismatch  technique 
for each impact velocity P u and cp this method 
requires  three  coefficients  Ec  1  and  2  to 
identify the rod threshold for each explosive. Since 
to  be  obtained  from  rod 
experiments it appears that this method is more a 
technique for providing a fit to existing data rather 
than  being  able  to  predict  a rod threshold  from a 
1D flyer threshold. However Moulard shows that 
equation 5 using one set of coefficients 1 and 
2 fits a variety  of 2D projectiles such as those 
with  rectangular  and  annular  cross-sections  as 
well  as  projectiles  impacting  covered  explosives. 
Consequently he could claim that with two sets of 
experimental  threshold  data  flyers  and  rods  into 
the  bare  HE  his  method  would  predict  the 
a  variety  of  2D  projectile 
configurations. Although not explicitly laid out in 
the  paper  presumably  a  would  follow 
geometric  relationships  listed  in  Table  1  for  the 
various  rod  cross-sections  and  equation  6 
adjusted accordingly. 
The  two  remaining  models  are  in  a  sense 
mirror images of each other. In both cases a single
experimental  dataset  is  all  that  is  required  to  go 
from  a  1D  flyer  threshold  to  thresholds  produced 
by  various  2D  projectile  configurations.  In  the 
RHC  Criterion  it  is  assumed  that  the  reaction  is 
located  at  the  shock  front  in  the  HE  and  is  only 
attenuated by the rarefaction catching up with this 
Table 1. Critical areas for Moulards criterion. 
Rectangle  of  sides  L1  and 
R1 external radius R 
Hence  in  the  flyer  impacts  the  definition  of 
1D duration has to be changed from that given by 
Walker  and  Wasley9  to  the  time  taken  for  the 
rarefaction  from  the  rear  of  the  flyer  to  catch  up 
with the shock in the explosive i.e. to go beyond 
just reaching the flyerHE interface. This catch up 
where  c  is  the  sound  speed  in  the  shocked 
explosive  and  W  is  the  shock  velocity  in  the 
The concept of shock duration is retained for 
both the 1D and 2D impacts. In order to obtain the 
same value of Ec for both rods and flyers the time 
for  the  2D  duration  is  taken  as  the  time  for  a 
rarefaction from the periphery  of the rod to reach 
the rods centre line i.e.  
                     
In the James Criterion4 the opposite approach 
is taken where the 1D duration is kept the same as 
that  of  Walker  and  Wasley  i.e.  equation  2. 
From  the  derivation  of  2  this  implies  that  the 
initial peak reaction rate has to be located close to 
the  flyerHE  interface  in  order  for  the rarefaction 
to have the ability to attenuate the reaction growth 
in  the  HE  at  the  Walker-Wasley  time  i.e.  if  the 
rarefaction  arrives  just  before  the  Walker-Wasley 
time  because  the  flyer  thickness  is  below  that 
needed  for  the  initiation  threshold  it  is  able  to 
damp  out the reaction growth  and initiation  fails. 
The adoption of the Walker-Wasley time term also 
means  the  duration  for  the  rod  has  to  be  less 
than the time taken for the peripheral rarefaction to 
reach  the  centre  line  in  order  to  obtain  the  same 
value of Ec for both rod and flyer. This is achieved 
by  changing  the  definition  of  the  time  at  the 
initiation threshold. 
For  a rod  impact  the  shock  front  travels  into 
the  explosive  while  a  rarefaction  releases  the 
pressure by moving inwards from the periphery of 
the  rod.  The  volume  formed  between  the rodHE 
interface the leading edge of the rarefaction and 
the  shock  front  contains  the  non-divergent  flow 
generated  by  the  initial  impact.  The  criterion 
assumes that it is this non-divergent flow which is 
primarily  responsible  for  causing  initiation.  This 
volume is approximated dashed line in Fig. 1 as 
a  cylinder  with  a  straight  side  parallel  to  the 
direction of impact and which has one end located 
at  the  position  where  the  head  of  the  rarefaction 
intersects the rodHE interface as shown in Fig. 1.  
Fig. 1. Diagram of rod impact. The full structure is 
obtained by rotating the diagram about the axis of 
symmetry bottom of the figure.  
The  definition  of    in  the  criterion  is  then 
given  as  being  the  time  at  which  the  maximum 
volume of non-divergent flow is present in the HE 
during  an  impact  which  corresponds  to  the 
initiation threshold. This does not change the flyer 
value  of    as  originally  derived  by  Walker  and 
Wasley  and  allows  the  same  value  of  Ec  to  be 
obtained for both flyer and rod thresholds.  
The  cylindrical  approximation  of  the  volume 
of non-divergent flow in the HE at time t is given 
Here  c  is  the  sound  speed  of  the  head  of  the 
rarefaction in the explosive Vol is the volume of 
non-divergent flow and the other parameters have 
already been defined above.  
To  find  the  maximum  volume  differentiate 
with respect to time at t and set the differential 
Setting the term in the square brackets to zero 
gives      D6c note  setting  Rct  in  10  gives 
the time when the volume is zero. Hence for rods 
The leading edge of the rarefaction has reached a 
radius of 2R3 at that time. 
For  a  given  impact  velocity  the  maximum 
volume at the threshold is the boundary of a set of 
maximum  volumes  of  increasing  size  resulting 
from projectiles of increasing diameter which will 
all  cause  initiation  at  that  velocity.  In  fact  the 
maximum volume at the threshold is the minimum 
of all the volumes that are able to cause initiation 
at  that  impact  velocity.  This  threshold  value  will 
be referred to as the critical volume. If the impact 
velocity  is  increased  the  critical  volume  will 
decrease but again it is the minimum volume for 
all  the  possible  rod  impacts  that  can  cause 
initiation at that velocity.  
A circular disc of diameter D and thickness s 
can act as either a rod or a flyer depending upon 
the ratio of s to D. The cross-over between the two 
behaviours  stems  from  the  fact  that  it  has  been 
ensured  that  Ec  is  the  same  for  both  types  of 
projectiles  when  impacting  the  same  explosive. 
So at the cross-over for a given impact 
For  a  flyer  at  the  threshold  for  a  given 
velocity D has to be larger than that obtained by 
equation  13  otherwise  the  projectile  must  be 
counted  as  a  rod.  This  means  that  at  this  given 
impact velocity the flyer must also have a volume 
of  non-divergent  flow  that  is  larger  than  the 
critical  volume  associated  with  the  rod  simply 
through  the need  for  the  flyer  to  have  this  larger 
value  of  D  note  that  you  cannot  reduce  the 
volume by reducing s since this would violate the 
flyer  threshold.  The  flyer  threshold  is  at  a 
minimum  time    to  cause  initiation  i.e.  the  old 
Walker-Wasley definition of duration. There can 
be  flyers  with  longer  durations  but  at  a  given 
velocity these are all above the threshold. 
So  at  the  cross-over  between  rod  and  flyer 
thresholds the projectile is at both a minimum time 
and  a  minimum  shock  volume  for  that  impact 
velocity to cause initiation. If we keep the velocity 
constant  but  increase  D the  projectile  becomes  a 
flyer which has already satisfied the critical shock 
volume  criterion  it  has  a  larger  volume  than 
needed  to  cause  initiation  but  it  also  needs  to 
satisfy  the  minimum  duration  which  depends  on 
s  to  ensure  initiation  proceeds.  If  on  the  other 
hand  we  increase  s  but  keep  D  at  the  cross-over 
value  we  have  satisfied  the  minimum  time 
increasing  s  but  we  now  need  to  ensure  the 
critical volume requirement is satisfied. 
Consequently  for  the  James  Criterion  any 
projectile has to satisfy both the minimum duration 
and  critical  shock  volume  requirements  before 
initiation  can  proceed.  Failing  either  of  them 
means that a non-initiation takes place. 
Turning  this  around  means  that  for  a  given 
impact the James Criterion implies that initiation 
can only take place once a given critical volume of 
explosive  has  been  exposed  to  a  non-divergent 
shock  and  at  least  part  of  that  volume  has 
undergone a given minimum shock duration.  
Table 2 summarises the expressions used for 
by the James Criterion. 
The range of projectiles covered by the James 
encompassed by the Moulard model as it includes 
geometries  with  curved  surfaces11.  However  one 
omission is that while Moulard copes with  
Table 2. Values of  for different projectile geometries in the James Criterion. 
                 Expression for   
Projectile geometry 
Flyer of thickness  s 
Circular flat-nosed rod. 
Rod length    D12 see eqn. 13. 
Sides of impact surface L1 L2
Block thickness  s. 
One  side  of  impact  surface  much 
smaller than the other i.e.  
Sphere or hemisphere 
                     2sWp 
                     D6c 
                      
                      L4c  to first order 
                       D18c 
annular  configurations  the  James  Criterion  does 
not. The reason for this is that the shock structure 
produced  by  such  a  projectile  is  potentially  very 
complex. In the HE adjacent to the central hole in 
the  projectile  the  shock  has  been  partly  released 
by the rarefaction from the edge of the hole but is 
cylindrical  convergence  of  the  shock  onto  the 
centre-line. Once this convergence has taken place 
some jetting of the explosive may be experienced 
along the centre-line since the central hole has no 
initiation may be due to a complex summation of 
centre-line effects plus the shock which is present 
over the solid portion of the annulus. 
the  HE.  Consequently 
This  combination  is  beyond  the  capability  of 
the  James  Criterion  which  is  predicated  on  the 
assumption that any initiation is principally driven 
by  the  non-divergent  region  of  the  shock.  To 
construct the shock from the impact of an annulus 
with any fidelity would require a hydrocode while 
an  empirical  initiation  criterion  would  almost 
certainly  have  to  be  more  complex  than  that 
currently under discussion. Moulard at least in his 
paper1  ignores  these  complexities  and  simply 
shows  the  experimental  results  as  interpreted  in 
Table  1 as  lying  on the  same log-log  plot  as his 
less complex projectiles. 
Many  explosives  show  an  initiation  cut-off 
below  a  certain  pressure  where  initiation  fails 
regardless of the duration of the shock5. The James  
Criterion  was  modified  to  account  for  such 
behaviour by the addition of a critical specific  
energy  term  c  to  the  threshold  equation  such 
where  Ec  and  c  are  constants  for  a  given 
explosive  EPu  for  the  given  geometry  of 
projectile at the particular projectile  velocity and 
u22.  It  was  found  more  convenient  to  invert 
this  expression  which  does  not  change 
threshold value but allows 14 to be expressed as 
detonations and J1 for non-initiations. The value 
of  J  gives  an  indication  of  how  far  from  the 
threshold a particular impact lies. 
insensitive the explosive. 
The  additional  experimental data required  by 
Moulards  model  rules  it  out  in  favour  of  the 
James and RHC Criteria. These latter two models 
have  values  of  Ec  for  the  same  HE  that  differ  by 
about  a  factor  of  three.  However  there  is  no  a 
priori method of determining the correct value of 
Ec and so to distinguish between these models they   
will now be compared to independent observations 
of the phenomena they are trying to predict. 
1D Shock Initiation Analysis 
In-material gauges located in the HE show an 
increase  in  particle  velocity  behind  a  sustained 
input  shock15.  This  hump  grows  larger  and 
moves nearer to the shock as the shock penetrates 
further  into  the  explosive  eventually  catching  up 
detonation wave. A common misconception is that 
in  some  way  this  hump  is  the  reaction.  In  fact 
such  gauges  measure  the  hydrodynamic  response 
of  the  explosive  to  the  extent  of  reaction  and  the 
reaction rate for brevity reaction and reaction rate 
will  often  be  lumped  together  under  the  general 
term  of  reaction.  Obviously  the  presence  of  the 
hump indicates reaction since an equivalent shock 
into an inert material will remain as a flat-topped 
shock    until  the  rarefaction  from  the  rear  of  the 
projectile  catches  up  with 
However the actual relationship between reaction 
and the magnitude and timing of the hump can be 
far from straightforward. Analysis16 of in-material 
gauge  records  for  a  number  of  explosives  led  to 
the conclusion that reaction was driven by both the 
local  shock  strength  and  the  time  which  had 
elapsed along a particle path behind that part of the 
shock  while  the  amplitude  of  the  flow  field  the 
hump is determined by a function of the integral 
of  the  reaction  rate  and  flow  field  over  the  time 
elapsed since the initial impact.  
It  can  be  seen  in  Fig.  2a  that  for  some 
considerable time after impact the highest reaction 
rate  at  a  given  time  occurs  at  the  flyerHE 
interface. Consequently a rarefaction from the rear 
of  a  flyer  that  has  a  thickness  just  above  the 
initiation threshold will arrive at the interface and 
perturb the peak reaction rate that is present in the 
explosive as shown in Fig. 2b so lengthening the 
run  to  detonation.  A  rarefaction  from  a  thinner 
flyer will cause sufficient perturbation to stop the 
initiation  process.  In  these  figures  CREST  uses  a 
temperature variant of the reaction model in order 
to  more  accurately  capture  the  effect  of  the 
rarefaction in thin pulses7.  
An analysis  of  the  initial  stages  of  the  shock 
initiation  using  the  method  of  characteristics  to 
model  the  dynamics  of  the  flow  field  and  a  very 
simple  reaction  model  based  on 
observations  CIM17  reproduced  much  of  the 
observed  behaviour  and  showed  that  along  a 
particle  path  there  was  a  separation  between  the 
peak  reaction  rate  and  the  peak  particle  velocity 
i.e.  the  top  of  the  hump.  A  more  complete 
hydrocode-based  reactive  burn  model  called 
CREST67  has  been  developed 
observations  and  Fig.  2a  shows  the  1D  peak 
reaction rate and peak particle velocity trajectories 
produced  by  a  CREST  simulation  of  a  sustained 
shock  generated  in  the  HMX-based  explosive 
Fig.  2.  CREST  simulations  showing  the  relative  
positions of the peak particle velocity and reaction 
rates behind the shock. 
In contrast the RHC  criterion assumes ..  the 
shock  is  reactive  current  authors  italics  and 
consequently reaction will only be quenched if the 
release  wave  reaches  this  reactive  front  before 
sufficient reaction growth has occurred to produce 
reaction.3  However  both 
CREST  and  the  CIM  analysis  show  the  peak 
reaction rate to be some distance behind the shock 
and  Fig.  2b  shows  that  considerable  perturbation 
to the reaction rate and peak particle velocity has 
been caused well before the rarefaction catches up 
with  the  shock  front.  Hence  on  this  basis  the 
rarefaction only needs to reach the interface rather 
to  determine  whether 
initiation occurs appears to be well founded. 
the  James  Criterion 
Gustavsen  has  fired  8.5  12.7  and  17mm 
diameter steel flat-nosed rods into PBX95011819 at 
0.74kms.  The  HE  was  of  different  thicknesses 
with particle velocity measurements being taken at 
specific  points  along  the  explosives  rear  surface 
Fig. 3. The 8.5mm rod was a non-initiation while 
two  diameters  eventually  caused 
detonation in HE thicknesses greater than 6mm. 
Fig.  3.  Diagrammatic  representation  of  rod 
impacts into different thicknesses of HE. 
Not  shown  in  Fig.  3  is  a  PMMA  window 
mounted  behind  the  HE.  The  velocity  of  the 
HEPMMA  interface  is  measured  by  Photonic 
Doppler  Velocimetry  PDV18  which  gives  the 
interface  at  multiple  radial 
positions.  A typical set of traces is shown in Fig 
Taking the portion of the dataset for the three 
rod diameters and all the available HE thicknesses 
3-12mm  in  which  results  have  not  reached  a 
detonation normalising the particle velocity of the 
shock as it reaches the radial probes to that of the 
probe  on  the  centre-line  of  the  rod  and  plotting 
them  against  normalised  probe  radius  gives  the 
growth pattern shown in Fig. 5.  
Fig. 4. Experiment showing a 17mm rod impacting 
6mm  thick  PBX9501  with  the radial  positions  of 
the PDV probes about the rod centre-line noted. A 
representative selection of positions of the particle 
velocity at the shock front is shown. 
Fig.  5  shows  an  approximately  constant 
plateau in the particle velocity behind the shock as 
it  arrives  at  increasing  radial  distances  from  the 
position  of  the  rod  radius  that  corresponds  to 
maximum  non-divergent  shock  volume  for  that 
impact  2R3  see  earlier.  Beyond  that  there  is  a 
steep drop in the normalised particle velocity. The 
absolute  change  in  the  particle  velocity  is  shown 
for  the  three  rod  diameters  at  3  and  6mm 
thicknesses  of  PBX9501  in  Fig.  6.  An  inert 
hydrocode simulation at these two HE thicknesses 
is  shown  for  comparison.  The  combined  results 
from  Figs.  5 and  6  shows  that the  plateau  within 
the  maximum  volume  region  increases  as  the 
shock  penetrates  the  HE  even  initially  for  an 
impact which eventually fails to cause detonation. 
This  increase  puts  the  particle  velocities  above 
those calculated for an inert impact and so must be 
a  function  of  the  chemical  energy  release  in  the 
HE.  Outside  the  maximum  volume  position  the 
experimental results follow the inert calculation in 
Fig.  6  indicating  that  little  or  no  reaction  takes 
place in this region. 
Fig. 5. Experimental normalised particle velocities 
the  shock  front  versus  normalised  radial 
positions of the probes in the PBX9501 sample. 
Fig. 7. CREST simulation of a 13.15mm diameter 
EDC37. Initial impact pressure is 4.8GPa. 
impacting  different 
For  both  the  experiment  and  the  simulation 
the growth pattern in particle velocity at the shock 
front  due  to  the  reaction  occurs  fairly  uniformly 
over  the  radius  corresponding  to  the  maximum 
non-divergent  shock  volume  with  little  or  no 
indication  of  reaction  occurring  outside 
volume. This pattern is repeated for impacts below 
8.5mm  rod  just  above  12.7mm  rod  and  well 
above 17mm rod the initiation threshold and at 
all  HE  thicknesses  before  either  detonation  or 
complete  failure  occurs.  Since  this  pattern  occurs 
on both sides of the initiation threshold it strongly 
indicates that it is the conditions within all or the 
major part of the maximum volume which at the 
threshold corresponds to the critical volume in the 
Consequently  this  pattern  resembles  the  shock 
structure  required  by  the  James  Criterion  for 
determining the 2D initiation threshold.  
that  determine  whether 
The  2D  growth  pattern  does  not  support  the 
RHC  hypothesis  of  a  potential  initiation  that  is 
determined  by  conditions 
proximity of the rod centre-line. These conditions 
would  have  to  be  extinguished  by  a  rarefaction 
that presumably is only a short distance away from 
that  centre-line  in  the  12.7mm  impacts.  The 
12.7mm impacts occur just above the experimental 
threshold  but  are  described  earlier  as  possessing 
the  same  plateau  configuration  as  all  the  other 
observed in the vicinity of the centre-line that at a 
i.e.  no  significant  release  wave 
Fig. 6. Absolute changes in particle velocity at the 
initial shock as the shock front crosses increasing 
thicknesses  of  HE.  Initial  impact  pressure  is 
It  should  be  noted  that  for  the  thicker  HE 
samples  the  head  of  the  peripheral  rarefaction 
would  for  an  inert impact  be  close  to  or  would 
have  reached  the  rod  centre-line  at  the  rodHE 
interface again indicating that much of the plateau 
is due to the HE reaction.. 
A  similar  pattern  is  found  when  running 
CREST reactive and inert simulations of the above 
experiment Fig. 7 albeit with a slightly different 
explosive EDC37 and rod diameter. The velocity 
drop off might be occurring at a slightly smaller 
radius compared to experiment. In this figure both 
an entropy and a temperature variant of CREST67
show similar behaviours. 
slightly  smaller  diameter  would  have  eliminated 
the initiation conditions and prevented detonation. 
analysis and hydrocode simulations in both 1D and 
2D impact scenarios indicate that out of the three 
initiation  criteria  considered  it  is  the  so-called 
James Criterion that appears to give the best match 
to the observed shock phenomena while requiring 
a  minimum  of  experimental  data  in  order  to 
provide  predictions  of  a  wide  range  of  initiation 
This Criterion requires that a projectile impact 
has  to  generate  both  a  minimum  non-divergent 
shock duration and a critical shock volume in the 
HE  for  a  given  impact  before  initiation  can 
location  of  the  peak  reaction  rate  at  the  1D 
flyerHE  interface  supports  the  Criterions  use  of 
the  shock  reverberation  time9  in  calculating  the 
theoretically  determined 
Moulard1  postulated  the  need  for  the  impact 
shock  to  occupy  more  than  just  a  point  on  the 
centre-line  at  2D 
suggested the concept of a critical area. However 
the  James  Criterion  requirement  for  a  critical 
volume  both  eliminates  the  need  for  an  extra 
empirical equation e.g. equation 5 in Moulards 
model  and  appears  to  be  more  in  keeping  with 
the  need  for  given  number  of  hotspots  to  be 
activated  in  order  to  trigger  initiation.  These 
hotspots are generally three dimensional in nature 
and  so  presumably  have  to  occupy  a  certain 
volume20. This allows a qualitative link to be made 
between  the  Criterion  and  some  aspects  of  the 
mesoscale  structure  of  initiation in heterogeneous 
The  author  wishes  to  thank  Rick  Gustavsen 
and his team at LANL for making their excellent 
rod  results  available  and 
modelling  team  at  AWE  for  many  enlightening Probabilistic Shock Threshold Development for LX-17 
John S. Christensen Michael Gresshoff and Kevin J. McMullen 
Defense Technologies Engineering Division 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94550 
Abstract. The Probabilistic Shock Threshold Criterion PSTC is a tool that provides a 
probabilistic  assessment  of  margin  of  initiation  at  various  interfaces  through  explosive 
initiation trains. Our current focus of work is to acquire the necessary data to parameterize 
the criterion with plastic bonded explosive LX-17-1 92.5 wet-aminated TATB 7.5 
Kel-F 800 binder. As we accumulate data for LX-17 and other explosives the form of 
the PSTC will be revisited. This paper provides an update on this work-in-progress with 
our latest data on LX-17 and PSTC parameter fits to this data. 
and  magnitude  must 
initiation  of  135-triamino-246trinitrobenzene  TATB-based  explosives  such  as 
LX-17 92.5 TATB 7.5 Kel-F 800 has been 
studied  extensively  for  applications 
explosive safety and performance regimes.12345 In 
particular  initiation  sensitivity  has  been  assessed 
using  gap  tests  gun  tests  flyer  plates  bullet 
impacts  etc.  To  minimize  uncertainty  in  the 
input  pressure  pulse 
characterized.  Bullet  or  explosively 
projectile  EFP  experiments  are  generally  more 
qualitative and often difficult to extend beyond the 
actual test. For small gap tests the pressure pulse 
in  the  acceptor  can  be  highly  divergent  and 
therefore complicate data interpretation. For large 
enough gap tests in which the pulse is effectively 
one-dimensional  handling  and  experiment  costs 
become  more  prohibitive.  Flyer  plates 
generate  planar  wave  inputs  are  more  easily 
characterized  and  therefore  enable  clearer  data 
To  this  end  we  have  obtained  high  quality 
initiation  threshold  data  for  high  density  98 
TMD  LX-17-1  explosive  using  LLNLs  electric 
gun.67  The  electric  gun  e-gun  is  essentially  a 
large  capacitor  bank  44.8  kJ  at  capacity  that  is 
discharged across a Kapton-coated 50.8-m thick 
aluminum foil. The aluminum foil rapidly expands 
and  thereby  propels  a  Kapton  flyer  over  some 
adjustable  distance  to  impact  the  explosive.  The 
flyer  area  cross-section  and  impact  velocity  are 
all  highly  tunable  to  achieve  a  desired  pressure 
pulse. Further by reducing the size of the impactor 
below  the  failure  diameter  for  sustaining  an 
unconfined  detonation  approximately  12 mm  for 
LX-178  we  obtain data  to parameterize  the  onedimension James criterion over varying diameters.   
The  probabilistic  shock  threshold  criterion 
PSTC  is  an  extension  of  the  James  Initiation 
Criterion.9  The purpose of the PSTC is to develop 
a phenomenological shock initiation criterion to be 
used  in  safety  and  performance  assessments  of 
information in explosive initiation threshold series 
to  fit  parameters  which  allow  for 
quantifying  margin  of  initiation  in  terms  of  a 
single parameter and also give a sense of what the 
margin  means  with 
the  assigned  probability 
distribution.  The  PSTC  form  also  facilitates 
where Us  shock velocity 
S  slope of linear Hugoniot 
this  relationship  for 
shocked  explosive  sound  speed  is  for  metals  and 
proposes  another  for  explosives.  However  with 
the Gruneisen gamma  varying from 0.5 to 1.5 
the  difference  in  sound  speed  between  the  two 
equations  is  at  most  3  in  the  range  of  particle 
velocities  that  are  relevant  in  this  study.  It  is  not 
until much higher pressures that the two equations 
deviate substantially. 
Parameterization of the coefficients Ec c dc 
k  is  accomplished  by  assigning  a  probability 
distribution  and  using  a  maximum  likelihood 
estimator  MLE  to  simultaneously  fit  the  PSTC 
parameters  and  distribution  parameters  to  the 
available threshold series data. We have found that 
using  a  convolution  of  a  normal  and  Pareto 
distribution  provides  the  best  fits  to  the  data 
though  have  also  evaluated  normal  log-normal 
and Weibull distributions.   
Experimental Methods 
The electric gun is a large capacitor discharge 
unit CDU.6 The CDU is comprised of four Kraft 
paperCastor  oil  capacitors  mounted  on  a  cart. 
Each  capacitor  is  nominally  rated  at  14 F  and 
40 kV for a total of 56 F. At full charge the bank 
is capable of storing 44.8 kJ of energy.  
A  copperKapton  laminate  with  a  square 
aluminum bridgefoil is used to produce a Kapton 
impactor see Fig. 1. The bridgefoil is 0.0508 mm 
thick  with  areas  ranging  from  3 mm x 3 mm  to 
25.4 mm x 25.4 mm. A Kapton layer 0.0508 mm1.27  mm  thick  is  adhered  over  the  bridge  using 
Pyralux DuPont adhesive. A barrel with a square 
opening of the same dimension as the bridgefoil is 
adhered  to  the  uppermost  Kapton  layer.  The 
laminate  is  attached  to  the  e-gun  via  a  rigid 
transmission  line  that  includes  a  thin  dielectric 
barrier  to  isolate  the  laminate  from  the  capacitor 
bank. Two shaped charge detonators are mounted 
against  a  dielectric  barrier  to  serve  as  a  puncture 
switch  thereby  allowing  current  to  flow  to  the 
inclusion  of  two-dimensional  initiation  effects 
such  as  sub-failure  diameter  impact  areas.  In  this 
paper  we  describe  further  development  of  the 
probabilistic  shock  initiation  criterion  specifically 
The  PSTC  is  represented  by  the  following 
equation.9 This form extends the one-dimensional 
James criterion allowing it to account for varying 
excitation diameters.   
1cid2032cid3436cid1831cid3030cid1831cid3030cid3440cid46801cid3436cid1856cid3030cid1856cid3440cid3038cid4681 
where   PSTC margin parameter 
E  energy fluence pup 
up  particle velocity 
  specific kinetic energy density up
k  reduced diameter scaling exponent 
subscript c  critical parameters 
The  shock  duration    for  thin  flyers  in  the 
minimum  of  the  rod  criterion  given  by  James10 
Equation 2 or the thin plate criterion as presented 
by Cooper11 Equation 3.   
is  calculated  using 
 cid2028cid3045cid3042cid3031cid18566cid1855 
cid2028cid3043cid3039cid3028cid3047cid3032 cid1872cid1847cid3033cid1872cid1844cid3033 
where c  sound speed in the shocked explosive 
Uf  shock velocity in flyer negative 
Rf  release wave velocity in flyer 
We  used  Jacobs  approximation  as  given  by 
Allison12  to  determine  the  sound  speed  c  in  the 
cid1855cid3435cid1847cid3046cid1873cid3043cid3439cid3435cid1847cid3046cid1845cid1873cid3043cid3439
foil and an acrylic disk. Two 5.5 mm focal length 
PDV focusing probes are mounted on the disk and 
directed  at  the  aluminum  foil.  The  probes  record 
the  velocity  of  the  HE  surface  and  the  recorded 
detonation is achieved.   
Fig. 2. For the diagnostic shot a PDV probe a is 
directed through a cold mirror b at the barrel and 
the Kapton that will be thrown c.  
It  is  critical  that  the  impactor  be  thrown 
consistently  at  a  given  set  of  firing  parameters 
because the impactor is not characterized directly 
during the initiability test and the impact velocity 
must  be  inferred  from  a  separate  diagnostic  shot. 
Three  diagnostic  shots  of  25.4 mm x 25.4 mm 
impactors were fired to verify the repeatability of 
flyer velocity and to study the impactor shape. In 
all three cases the PDV probe was focused on the 
center  of  the  Kapton  flyer  while  the  streak  plane 
was varied for each shot. 
The streak results are shown in Fig. 4. Streak 
a demonstrates a very planar impactthe 20 mm 
center section of the impactor arrives at the impact 
plane in a span of less than 35 ns. The edges of the 
impactor  drag  along  the  barrel  edges  and  arrive 
approximately  250 ns  after  the  center  impact. 
Streaks  b  and  c  demonstrate  how  the  flyer 
shape changes as the streaked plane approaches the 
barrel  edge.  The  shape  of  the  impactor  is  threedimensional but has a largely planar region in its 
The  PDV  velocity  histories  corresponding  to 
the same three impactors are shown in Fig. 3. The 
Fig. 1. Illustration of the laminate with a a thin 
aluminum bridge beneath a Kapton layer and b a 
copper  sheet  that  attaches  to  the  e-gun  which  c 
bends around the Kapton substrate. 
A  flyer  is  generated  by  charging  the  e-gun 
capacitors to a specified voltage and then firing the 
detonator  switch.  The  capacitor  bank  discharges 
into  the  laminate  bursting  the  aluminum  bridge 
and accelerating the Kapton cover layer down the 
barrel thus creating an impactor of the desired size 
and thickness. The velocity planarity and stability 
of  the  impactor  are  adjusted  by  varying  barrel 
length  and  charge  voltage.  Shock  duration  is 
varied via selection of the Kapton flyer thickness. 
Impactor  characterization  and  high  explosive 
threshold  experiments  are  performed 
separately.  The  impactor  characterization  shot 
measures  the  velocity  of  the  impactor  using 
photonic  Doppler  velocimetry 
captures  a  streak  image  of  the  impact  using  a 
rotating  mirror  camera.  An  impactor  is  fired  into 
an acrylic window installed at the end of the barrel 
rather  than  into  an  HE  sample.  A  cold  mirror 
placed above the laminate reflects visible light at a 
right  angle  to  the  rotating  mirror  camera.  The 
mirror  allows  the  1550 nm  laser  light  from  a 
240 mm focal length PDV probe to pass through to 
the  laminate  surface  where  it  reflects  and  is 
recollected see Fig. 2. To enhance the reflectivity 
of the Kapton surface a 300  aluminum coating 
is  vapor  deposited  on 
especially  important  for  impactors  with  thickness 
of 0.127 mm or less. 
The HE threshold experiments are a gono-go 
initiability  test.  The  acrylic  window  is  replaced 
with  a  25.4 mm  thick  LX-17-1  puck  with  a 
25.4 mm  or  50.8 mm  diameter  depending  on  the 
size of the impactor. The side of the HE opposing 
the impacted surface is covered with an aluminum 
center  point  of  the  flyers  followed  a  repeatable 
path with the same velocity steps characteristic of 
a shocked flyer ringing. All three flyers achieve a 
peak velocity just under 3.3 mms at impact. 
Fig.  3.  Velocity  traces  measured  at  the  center  of 
the impactor for the three shots described in Fig. 3.  
Fig. 4a. Streak images time moving right to left 
from  three  diagnostic  shots  fired  with  the  same 
parameters  and  imaged  at  the  approximate  streak 
locations  shown.  The  initial  light  corresponds  to 
flyer impact into the acrylic window. 
Fig.  4b.  Approximate  locations  of  streak  images 
shown in Figure 4a. 
A total of 79 explosive shots were fired with 
flyers ranging from 0.0508-mm thick to 1.27-mm 
thick and flyer diameters ranging from 3 mm up to 
25.4 mm.  Significantly  more  shots  were  fired 
without  explosive  to  characterize  flyer  and  e-gun 
performance.    The  data  that  is  used  in  parameter 
analysis  for  the  PSTC  is  the  flyer  material 
velocity thickness and critical dimension as well 
as explosive density.  
Fig. 5 shows the resulting data for shots fired 
with  Kapton  flyers  with  a  critical  dimension  of 
25.4 mm.  Note  that  the  two  shots  fired  with 
1.27-mm  thick  flyers  appear  to  be  the  same  and 
both  have  the  same  flyer  velocity  at  impact  of 
3.25 mms.  The  threshold  series  for  1.27-mm 
thick  25.4-mm  diameter  flyers  is  limited  by  the 
performance  of  the  e-gun.  The  NO-GO  shot  here 
was  fired  at  the  maximum  charging  voltage  of 
40 kV  with  an  LX-17  density  of  1.901 gcc.  In 
order  to  produce  a  detonation  the  density  was 
reduced to 1.892 gcc and the shot fired at 40 kV.   
Fig. 5 compares the threshold shots presented 
here with the threshold data collected in the 1970s 
and  1980s  and  presented  in  2010  labeled  Old 
Data.9  The  two  lines  in  the  figure represent  the 
highest NO-GO and the lowest GO and bound the 
original  threshold.  The  current  datas  thresholds 
are better resolved and are consistent with the old 
data  falling  within  the  expected  range.  The  old 
data represents various lots of RX-03-BB LX-17 
development  designation  and  dry-  and  wetaminated  LX-17  with  densities  from  1.88  gcc  to 
Fig.  5.  Threshold  series  on  LX-17  with  Kapton 
flyers  at  a  diameter  of  25.4 mm.  The  density  of 
LX-17 for all the shots in this series ranged from 
1.892 gcc  to  1.904 gcc.  Old  data  ranges  from 
1.880 gcc  to  1.920 gcc  and  includes  various 
development lots of LX-17 which are designated 
The energy fluence E and the specific kinetic 
energy  density    are  calculated  from  flyer 
velocitythickness data as discussed earlier. Fig. 6 
illustrates the same data shown in Fig. 5 in the -E 
space. Fig. 6 shows the 50 threshold curve that 
represents  the  James  criterion  one-dimensional 
Specific Kine c Energy MJkg 
Fig. 6. Threshold series at 25.4 mm in -E space 
with  the  fitted  50  threshold  line  Ec    1.054 
MJm2 and c  0.811 MJkg. 
Fig. 7 shows the PSTC fit to all the LX-17-1 
data 79 shots. There are 10 points that cross-over 
that  establish  the  probabilistic  part  of  the  PSTC.  
the  asymptotes  at  various  critical 
dimensions are not resolved fully by the data there 
is  higher  uncertainty 
previously presented though the results here better 
describe  the  threshold  space.  The  previously 
presented  PSTC  for  LX-17  was  fit  solely  to 
25.4-mm diameter flyer data to establish the James 
criterion  parameters  and  probability  distribution 
parameters.9 Reduced area terms were fit based on 
reduced  diameter  data  along  with 
hydrocode calculations of reduced diameter flyers.  
Fig. 7. PSTC fit to all data from a diameter of 25.4 
mm down to 3 mm. No detonations were observed 
at 3 mm. The solid threshold line corresponding to 
The  PSTC  parameters  for  the  LX-17-1  fit 
shown in Fig. 7 are as follows. The units of Ec are 
MJm2 and c are MJkg.  Density is in gcc.  As 
was  shown  in  Reference  9  the  critical  energy 
fluence and specific kinetic energy are functions of 
density  to  reduce  the spread  in  the final  fit.    The 
following  equations  are  valid  over  the  density 
range  of  1.809 gcc1.909 gcc 
Ec  1.174  3.265    0  12.215    02 
c  1.404  16.129    0  60.339    02 
k  1.673 dimensionless 
Parameters  for  the  convolved  normal-pareto 
distribution  are  given  below  with  the  probability 
distribution  functions  Equations  5  to  8  and 
 cid1842cid1830cid1832cid3015cid4666cid1877cid4667 1cid20262cid2024cid1857cid1876cid1868cid4678cid4666cid1877cid2020cid4667cid2870
2cid2026cid2870 cid4679 
 cid1842cid1830cid1832cid3017cid4666cid1876cid4667cid2009cid1876cid3040cid3080
cid1876cid3080cid2878cid2869  
 cid1842cid1830cid1832cid3015cid3017cid4666cid1876cid4667cid3505cid4670cid1842cid1830cid1832cid3015cid4666cid1877cid4667cid1842cid1830cid1832cid3017cid4666cid1876cid1877cid4667cid4671cid1856cid1877 
 cid1829cid1830cid1832cid3015cid3017cid4666cid1876cid4667cid3505cid1842cid1830cid1832cid3015cid3017cid4666cid1876cid4667cid1856cid1876 
This new data fits all PSTC parameters to the 
experimental  data  with  one  maximum  likelihood 
estimator  calculation  resulting  in  the  threshold  at 
reduced  area  shifted  lower  than  that  presented 
previously.9 In the past critical values for diameter 
were  fortuitously  calculated  at  roughly  13 mm 
near  the  critical  diameter  for  LX-17.8  This  new 
data  results  in  a  calculated  critical  diameter  of 
6.74 mm.    Note  that  this  critical  diameter  dc  is 
defined by Equation 1 and is not equivalent to the 
critical  diameter  to  sustain  a  detonation  with  an 
unconfined  charge.    The  reasons  for  the  shift  are 
not  unexpected  as  the  basis  for  the  previous 
reduced area scaling was the available data which 
limited  experimental  data  on 
undefined  rods  along  with  hydrocode  simulations 
using  the  Ignition  and  Growth  reactive  flow 
model.15  The  hydrocode  simulations  used  an 
Ignition and Growth model that was tuned to gun 
data  and  biased  towards  detonation  and  not 
initiation  since  there  was  insufficient  data  to 
calibrate the model at reduced diameters for short 
Fig.  8  and  Fig.  9  show  two  variations  on 
goodness-of-fit  that  are  used  to  determine  which 
assigned probability distribution provides the best 
fit.  PSTC  fits  were  performed  with  assigned 
Normal  Weibull  log-normal  and  the  convolved 
Normal-Pareto distributions. Fig. 8 is qualitative in 
that  it  shows  the  Go  Fraction  which  is  the 
quotient  of  the  running  sum  of  the  GOs  by  the 
running  sum  of  the  GOs  and  NO  GOs  and 
compares it to the fitted distribution. The data and 
calculated  based  on  the  other.  Fig.  9  shows  a 
quantitative  goodness-of-fit  where  if  the  data  is 
perfectly described by a convolution of a Normal 
distribution and a Pareto distribution the linear fit 
would be y  x with R2  1. 
line  are  related  but  one 
Fig.  8.  Comparison  of  datas  Go  Fraction  to  the 
convolved  Normal-Pareto  distribution  with  the 
parameters given above. 
Fig. 9. Goodness-of-fit of the convolved NormalPareto  distribution  to  the  Go  Fraction  of  the 
data.  If  the  data  is  not  well  described  by  the 
assigned  distribution 
the  data  will  deviate 
significantly from the y  x line. 
  We have fired 79 shots on a single lot of wetaminated LX-17 to collect thin-flyer threshold data 
with  thicknesses  between  0.0508 mm-1.27 mm 
and diameters from 3 mm-25.4 mm. This data has 
been used to fit parameters to the PSTC and James 
criterion.  The parameter fits match well with data. 
Comparison  of  the  PSTC  fits  here  to  those 
presented before9 shows that there is a difference. 
It is unknown if this is due to differences between 
the  Kapton  used  in  the  late  1970s  and  early 
1980s16 and the newly produced material used for 
this  study.  Future  work  will  investigate  both  the 
Hugoniot  of  Kapton  of  the  historical  flyers  we 
have  a  limited  quantity  remaining  and  the  new 
Kapton used in our experiments. The offset in the 
thresholds could also be due to a large quantity of 
the  previously  collected  data16  having  been 
produced  using  development  lots  of  LX-17  RX
temperature  effects  on 
The  work  presented  here 
03-BB  which  used  dry-aminated  TATB.  Future 
work will investigate the differences in wet versus 
dry aminated TATB different formulation lots of 
92.5  TATB  and  7.5  Kel-F  800  as  well  as 
is  a  work-inprogress.  The  current  form  of  the  PSTC  is  an 
empirical  fit  to  data  that  equally  scales  the  two 
James  sensitivity  parameters  for  decreasing  flyer 
diameters. Although the collected data set seems to 
support  this  equal  scaling  for  LX-17  additional 
data  and  further  analysis  are  required  to  indicate 
the final form more conclusively.   
This work was performed under the auspices 
of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy  USDOE  by 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory LLNL 
under contract DE-AC52-07NA27344. Experimental and Numerical Analysis of Thermomechanical Effects during Laser 
Irradiation of Confined Explosives 
Martin Lueck Jens Osterholz and Matthias Wickert 
Impact Physics Department Laser Technology Group 
Fraunhofer Institute for High-Speed Dynamics Ernst-Mach-Institut EMI 79104 Freiburg Germany 
Abstract. The thermal initiation process of explosives under intense laser irradiation is 
studied for exemplary materials. The focus is on the investigation of the time scales of 
heat transfer and the reaction mechanism of the explosive material including its pressure 
dependency  in  addition  to  the  temperature  dependency.  In  the  experimental  part  of  the 
work  confined  samples  of  high  explosive  materials  Composition B  Seismoplast  are 
irradiated with a cw laser with a power in the kilowatt regime. The samples are equipped 
with  temperature  and  pressure  diagnostics  which  allow  a  quantitative  measurement  of 
these  thermodynamic  quantities  inside  the  sample  during  laser  irradiation.  The 
measurements reveal important information about the time scales of thermal effects and 
the reaction kinetics. For the interpretation of the experimental data computer simulations 
calculating  the  non-reactive  thermal  part  of  the  process  are  presented.  Furthermore  an 
approach  to  modeling  the  temperature  and  pressure  dependent  chemical  kinetics  is  laid 
out based on an Arrhenius-based reaction rate law and a mixture rule that accounts for 
solid reactants and gaseous reaction products in the simulation volume. 
The response of explosive materials to thermal 
loads is an important topic with great relevance to 
the  safety  of  explosive  devices  and  with  possible 
applications  to  explosive  ordnance  disposal.  For 
the  characterization  of  the  thermal  sensitivity  of 
explosives  different  types  of  tests  have  been 
developed  in  the  past.  In  such  cookoff  tests  an 
explosive  sample  is  slowly  heated  and  a  critical 
explosive  can  be  determined.  For  the  classical 
cookoff  tests  electronic  heat  sources  or  radiant 
heaters are normally applied and controlled to give 
a  well-defined  heating  rate.  Two  examples  for 
cookoff  tests  mark  the  range  of  typical  heating 
rates  The  Scaled  Thermal  Explosion  Experiment 
STEX1  applies  an  external  temperature  increase 
of 0.0003 Cs. The Sandia Instrumented Thermal 
Ignition SITI test2 uses 0.3 Cs.  
In the recent years cookoff experiments using 
high-power  lasers  as  a  heat  source  have  been 
described  by  different  authors345.  Similar  to 
classical cookoff tests the absorption of the laser 
energy  leads  to  a  temperature  increase  at  the 
surface  of  the  irradiated  sample.  Due  to  heat 
conduction  the  explosive  material  in  the  interior 
of the sample also gets heated until the conditions 
of a thermal ignition are reached. For the analysis 
and  the  interpretation  of  this  type  of  experiment 
however  it  has  to  be  considered  that  there  are 
some  fundamental  differences  between  classical 
and  laser  cookoff  tests.  On  the  one  hand  the 
heating rates in the laser cookoff experiments are 
typically  much  higher 
experiments. On the other hand the laser energy 
is absorbed locally in a specific area of the sample 
whereas  heating  appears  uniformly  in  a  classical 
cookoff  test.  These  factors  result  in  substantial 
temperature  gradients  and  in  an  inhomogeneous 
temperature distribution of the explosive material 
comparison between classical thermal ignition and 
laser  ignition  experiments  and  the  fundamental 
differences  between  the  setups  are  schematically 
Fig.  1  Sketch  of  different  heating  directions  and 
temperature  distributions  in  classic  cookoff  and 
laser cookoff tests. 
In this work the thermal initiation of confined 
explosives  by  laser  irradiation  is  addressed.  We 
start with an overview of the scientific background 
of thermal initiation and the numerical description 
of  the  thermomechanical  modeling  of  explosives. 
For a systematic experimental investigation of the 
basic  phenomena  a 
developed  which  allows  the  measurement  of 
important  physical  quantities  such  as  temperature 
and  pressure  in  the  interior  of  a  laser  irradiated 
cookoff sample. A special focus of this work is the 
investigation of the effect of the laser power on the 
time  scale  of  pressure  build-up  and  the  point  of 
time  of  thermal  ignition  for  different  types  of 
explosives.  In  addition  the  potential  of  this 
experimental  work  towards  the  development  of 
numerical simulations of laser cookoff tests taking 
into  account  temperature-  and  pressure-dependent 
reaction rates is discussed and first approaches for 
the numerical simulation are developed. 
Scientific Background 
When  referring  to  the  thermal  mode  of  laser 
initiation-as  opposed  to  shock  initiation  using 
more intense laser pulses678 we can build upon an 
extensive literature on classic thermal ignition and 
also  some  work  on  laser  ignition.  A  thermally 
initiated  reaction  of  an  explosive    also  called 
cookoff  can be divided into the preignition and 
represents  the  phase  before  the  ignition  of  the 
explosive material. Here ignition is defined as the 
point  of  time  when  the  reaction  becomes  selfsustaining. In the postignition regime the strength 
or violence of the reaction is of interest. 
In  literature  different  techniques  were  used 
and approximations were made to model these two 
cookoff  regimes.  The  preignition  phase  was 
mostly  approximated  to  be  a  thermal-chemical 
coupled  problem  as  for  example  by  Zinn  and 
Mader10.  The  chemical  models  trying  to  match 
results  of  the  one-dimensional  time  to  explosion 
ODTX test11 became more sophisticated by using 
multi-step  kinetics.12 
compared  with  ODTX  results  in  this  paper. 
Mechanical  forces  were  not  yet  considered. 
Comparably  Boley  and  Rubenchik5  numerically 
solved  the  heat  equation  including  an  Arrhenius 
source  term  to  simulate  pulsed  laser  initiation  of 
confined  explosives  and 
thus  by  neglecting 
mechanical  effects  they  were  also  limited  to  the 
preignition  phase.  Rubenchik13  modelled  the  cw 
laser  as  a  localized  heat  source  and  analytically 
approximated  the  critical  temperatures  for  steady 
state as well as unsteady state laser initiation. Ali 
et  al.3  analytically  modelled  the  time  to  laser 
ignition  of  unconfined  explosives  based  on  laser 
irradiance using a dual criteria ignition model. 
Nevertheless  the  significance  of  mechanical 
effects  in  the  preignition  regime  was  already 
noticed  by  Zinn  and  Rogers14  who  used  the 
rupture of the confinement as an external quantity 
for  calculating  the  time  of  explosion  even  before 
completion of the reaction. Hobbs et al.15 included 
the  mechanical  domain 
into  a  preignition 
simulation by coupling a thermal-chemical with a 
mechanical  code  and  thereby  reproducing  ODTX 
times  to  explosion  as  pressure  failure  of  the 
confinement.  They  concluded  that  mechanics 
must  be  considered  in  cookoff  analysis.15  Very 
recently  Hobbs  and  Kaneshige16  published  a 
pressure-dependent  preignition  model  for 
TATB-based  insensitive  high  explosive  PBX 
9502 that reproduces a decreasing reaction rate due 
to  gas  release  or  venting  in  SITI  tests.  In  the 
simulations the energy equation is integrated and 
the pressure is calculated using appended auxiliary 
equations.  The  model  was  also  validated  with 
bucket17 tests. SITI and bucket tests apply pressure 
transducers as done in this work or omit them to 
investigate the effect of venting. The same authors 
found  the  reaction  rate  to  be  pressure-dependent 
for TNT18 but not for PETN19. 
Additional experimental evidence for possibly 
pressure-dependent reaction rates is indicated by a 
number  of  papers  Shaw  et  al.20  demonstrated  in 
their experiments the decreasing ignition times and 
temperatures with increasing static pressure of up 
energetic  materials 
nitromethane.  Similarly  stmark  and  Grns3 
found  the  critical  laser  ignition  energy  to  be 
decreasing with increasing ambient gas pressure of 
up to 100 bar for Composition B amongst others. 
However  Henson  et  al.21  argued  that  static  high 
to  dynamic  selfpressurization  when  determining  rate  constants. 
Kaneshige  et  al.2  observed  the  pressure  increase 
slowing down at the beginning of thermal runaway 
in  SITI  tests  with  HMX-based  PBX  9501  and 
associated this point in time with the completion of 
a gas generating process. 
is  not  equivalent 
Chidester et al.22 performed a comprehensive 
study on cookoff violence and thus also examined 
postignition  behavior.  With  instrumented  largescale 
thermalchemical preignition and hydrodynamic-reactive 
ignition and growth postignition simulations they 
showed that slow heating is more violent than fast 
heating  and  that  the  fragment  velocities  from 
thermal  explosions  can  be  as  fast  as  from 
intentional detonations. Likewise while analyzing 
Los Alamos Radial Cookoff tests23 Asay et al.  24 
stated that fast cookoff usually is less violent than 
slow  cookoff  because  the  reaction  starts  at  the 
surface  of  the  probe  instead  at  its  center.  These 
observations  lay  the  foundations  for  interpreting 
the results of our laser initiation tests in which the 
intense laser irradiation causes rather fast heating. 
Compared to the successive simulations made 
by Chidester et al.22 a different modeling strategy 
was  applied  by  Yoh  et  al.25.  In  a  single  thermalchemical-mechanical  hydrocode  simulation  they 
common  pressuremade 
independent  multi-step 
preignition  to  a  pressure-dependent  burn  front 
model  based  on  Vieilles 
including failure of the confinement. 
The  literature  on  pressure  dependency  in 
thermal ignition agrees upon the fact that the final 
fast  reaction  mostly  occurs  in  the  gas  phase  and 
that this amount of gas has to be held together for 
a  sustained  reaction.  External  confinement  as  in 
our  case  self-confinement  or  high  ambient 
pressure thus facilitate ignition. 
to  Yoh  et  al.25  we  want 
implement our explosive model into a hydrocode 
but  use  the  available  pressure  already  in  the 
preignition rate law formulation. 
Thermomechanical modeling of explosives 
into  a  mixture  of 
The presented explosive modeling follows the 
numerical approach that is often made in explosive 
science26. In this approach a computational cell is 
introducing new state variables for the phases and 
the reaction progress. This mixing rule distributes 
the  solid  reactant  phase  subscript s  and  the 
phase  of  the  gaseous  reaction  products  subscript 
 and specific internal energy 
The  progress  of  the  reaction  is  given  by  the 
 that ranges from value 0 only solid to 
value  1  only  gas  in  a  manner  described  by  the 
.  Our  reaction  rate  is  based  on 
temperature-dependent  Arrhenius  kinetics  using 
first-order depletion  of reactants  as  done by  Zinn 
  universal  gas  constant 
with  collision  frequency  factor 
.  It  is  a  central  part  of  our  work  to 
test  the  rate  law  for  a  possible  enhancement  by 
adding  a  pressure  dependency  based  on  our 
experimental results. For closure of the explosive 
initiation  model  mechanical 
thermal  equilibrium 
Thermodynamic and caloric equations of state are 
given  for  each  phase 
For  a  test  of  this  model  we  numerically 
solved the corresponding equations for the simple 
geometry  of  a  single  computational  cell  with 
confined  boundaries  and  constant  volume.  Fig.  2 
 vs. time plot and Fig. 3 gives an 
overview  of  the  changing  mixture  state  vs. 
normalizing  the  state  variables.  The  calculation 
yields  reasonable  results  with  some  numerical 
the  calculated  pressure  which 
restricts the model to the preignition regime in the 
present  implementation.  The  implementation  and 
verification  of  the  model  for  arbitrary  geometries 
in  a finite  elements  code  is currently  in  progress 
and  results  compared  to  experiments  will  be 
published in the future. 
Fig.  2.  Typical  temporal  evolution  of  reaction 
  for  first-order  Arrhenius 
Fig.  3.  Overview  of  relative  state  variables 
volumes  are  normalized  with 
energies  with  heat  of  reaction  and  equilibrium 
reached.  The  pressure  variable  shows  a  still 
persisting  problem  of  unsuccessful 
towards mixture equilibrium at the very end of the 
Experimental approach 
A  continuous-wave  Ytterbium  multi-mode 
fiber laser at a wavelength of 1070 nm with a laser 
power  in  the  kilowatt  regime  was  used  and 
installed in a ballistics laboratory together with the 
irradiated probe. This allowed the safe operation of 
explosives  reaction    also  by  reducing 
atmospheric  pressure 
reducing blast effects   and  the safe application 
of diagnostics like a high-speed video camera. The 
laser  beam  was  collimated  by  a  collimator 
resulting  in  a  beam  diameter  of  24 mm  at  the 
surface of the sample. 
The  laser  irradiated  probes  consist  of  a  1 cm 
thick  casing  made  of  free  cutting  steel  9SMn28. 
The rear cap is flanged on the cylinder with six M8 
bolts  and  sealed  with  a  Teflon  gasket.  The  inner 
explosive  cylinder  has  a  diameter  of  4  cm  and  a 
length of 5 cm. Two different types of explosives 
were  used  cast  Composition B  1.66 gcm  and 
Seismoplast 1.54 gcm which is as formable as 
knead and consists of 86  PETN. 
Three  0.5 mm  diameter 
thermocouples  were  placed  within  the  probe  via 
high pressure fittings specified up to 350 bars. The 
foremost  thermocouple  was  placed  at  the  steelexplosive interface at the axis of the probe on the 
right  hand  side  in  Fig.  4.  Here  the  highest 
temperature of the explosive and thus the point of 
ignition are expected since this position is opposite 
irradiated  steel  surface.  The  second 
thermocouple was inserted into the casing 10 mm 
behind  the  first.  Its  tip  was  located  at  the  outer 
surface  of  the  Composition  B  cylinder  and  was 
Seismoplast.  The  third  thermocouple  was  located 
in  the  middle  of  the  rear  cap  measuring  the 
temperature at the explosive cylinders back. 
Fig. 4. CAD drawing of sample design illustrating 
explosive filling and photograph of assembly with 
attached thermocouples and pressure sensor. 
Above  the  rear  thermocouple  the  piezoelectric  pressure  transducer  was  screwed  into  the 
rear cap the front face only 0.5 mm away from the 
inner  cap  surface.  The  pressure  transducer  was 
specified  up  to  250 bars  but  limited  to  around 
20 bars  by  the  charge  amplifier  setup.  Overall 
ullage  was  kept  at  a  minimum  in  order  to  avoid 
such  a  degree  of  freedom  which  also  constrains 
expansion  of  about  13   of  the  Composition  B 
component TNT at 80 C melting temperature.1 
Experimental results 
For  the  comparison  of  the  reaction  of  the 
different explosives used in the experiments Fig. 5 
shows a sequence of high-speed video images of a 
Composition  B  and  a  Seismoplast  sample  during 
irradiation with a laser power of 3 kW. The laser 
was  incident  onto  the  sample  from  the  right.  The 
light of the laser is not visible in the images since 
it was suppressed with an optical filter in order to 
the  camera  from  overexposure.  The 
ignition time t0 was determined by the analysis of 
the  high-speed  video  sequences  and  the  pressure 
measurement see below. The first row shows the 
sample  at  time  t0  while  the  following  images 
correspond  to  a  specific  delay  with  respect  to  t0. 
The  high-speed  video  records  reveal  a  major 
difference  between 
two  explosives.  The 
irradiation  of  the  Composition  B  sample  yields  a 
bright  flash  and  fragmentation  of 
whereas the kneadable Seismoplast charge escapes 
between the cylinder and the rear cap. Some light 
indicates  partial  reaction  and  emerging  dark 
unreacted  Seismoplast  or  plume  obscures  the  left 
part of the video images.  
The  fragmentation  of  the  samples  for  a  laser 
power from 1 kW to 5 kW can be compared in Fig. 
6. For the interpretation of the images we define 
four categories of damage also displayed in Fig. 6 
I screw elongation II failure of screw or thread 
III large fragments IV small fragments. 
Due  to  the  limited  number  of  experiments  a 
clear correlation between laser power and damage 
category  is  not  yet  possible.  However  there  is  a 
clear  trend  of  a  stronger  reaction  strength  of  the 
Composition B samples.  
The time to explosion t0 determined from the 
high-speed  video  recordings  and  the  pressure 
measurements is plotted in Fig. 7 as a function of 
laser  power.  For  both  explosives  there  is  a  clear 
trend  towards  a  shorter  time  to  explosion  with 
increasing laser power. 
Fig. 5 High-speed video recordings compared for 
Composition  B  and  Seismoplast  samples  being 
irradiated with a laser power of 3 kW at equivalent 
times starting from respective time to explosion t0. 
The  reaction  of  Composition  B  is  stronger  and 
causes bright flash and fragmentation. 
Fig.  6  Fragmentation  of  Composition  B  and 
Seismoplast  samples  after  irradiation  at  varying 
laser  power.  Composition  B  reacts  stronger  than 
Seismoplast.  Legend 
reaction strength I screw elongation II failure of 
screw  or  thread  III  large  fragments  IV  small 
Compared to the fragmentation results in Fig. 
6  three  additional  Seismoplast  experiments  are 
included  in  Fig.  7  in  which  the  screws  and  nuts 
holding together cylinder and rear cap were made 
from  a  lower  class  steel  grade  8.8  compared  to 
the  highest  class  12.9  used  in  most  of  the 
experiments.  It  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  the 
different  screw  type  does  not  affect  the  ignition 
temperature  while  it  might  have  an  influence  on 
the fragmentation of the sample. 
to  explosion  decreases  with 
increasing laser power.  
explosive  material 
The  temperature  and  pressure  inside  the 
sample  are  central  quantities  in  the  thermal 
explosion experiments. The highest temperature of 
configuration  can  be  found  axially  at  the  steelexplosive  interface  close  to  the  laser  spot.  There 
one  of  the  thermocouples  is  positioned  and  its 
three  Composition  B 
experiments are plotted in Fig. 8. After a delay of 
approximately  2 s  corresponding  to  the  thermal 
diffusion  time  in  the  1 cm  thick  steel  shell  the 
temperature  begins  to  rise.  The  higher  the  laser 
power the faster is the temperature increase. The 
ends of the curves represent the times to explosion 
and  the  characteristic  explosion  temperatures.  As 
also  shown  in  Fig.  7  the  time  to  explosion 
correlates  with  the  laser  power  but  there  is  no 
clear  correlation  between  explosion  temperature 
and  laser  power.  This  may  indicate  that  the 
position of the tip of the thermocouple is slightly 
moving  away  from  the  steel-explosive  interface 
resulting  in  an  underestimation  of  the  measured 
Beside  the  temperature  measurements  the 
pressure  inside  the  sample  was  measured  by  a 
piezo-electric pressure transducer. Fig. 9 shows the 
pressure  readings  from  two  experiments  at  2 kW 
laser power the one with Composition B and the 
other with Seismoplast inside. One characteristic is 
the  pressure  rise  time  i.e.  the  duration  of  the 
period from an observable pressure increase to the 
the  sample.  Logarithmic 
plotting of the pressure simplified determination of 
this characteristic. Its value is 2 s for Seismoplast 
and 1 ms for Composition B which is 2000 times 
Fig.  8  Measurement  of  foremost  thermocouple 
positioned  at  the  highest  temperature  of  the 
increases  faster.  The  curves  are 
plotted up to the time of explosion. 
Fig.  9  Pressure  readings  from  2  kW  tests  with 
Composition  B  and  Seismoplast.  The  pressure 
sensor  in  the  Seismoplast  test  detects  a  pressure 
increase long before the sensor in the Composition 
Simulation of heat transport 
For the further analysis of the experimental 
results we performed finite elements simulations 
of laser energy input and heat conduction inside 
the  sample.  For  the  1  kW  Composition  B 
experiment  shown  in  Fig.  8  the  thermal  nonreactive simulation is presented and compared to 
the thermocouple reading in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11. 
Temperature-dependent 
parameter  for  free  cutting  steel  9SMn28  are 
similar to those of AISI 1020 steel because of their 
similar  composition  and  can  be  found  in  the 
Composition  B  were 
Explosive Property Data29. Latent heat of melting 
did  not  need  to  be  considered  for  steel  for  this 
temperature  was  not  reached  until  ignition  at  all 
laser  powers.  Likewise  the  heat  losses  coming 
from convection and radiation were neglected for 
their  low  contribution  at  such  low  temperatures. 
Latent  heat  of  melting  of  Composition  B  was 
tested to make a difference of only a few degrees 
simulation  below.  Thermal  contact  between  the 
two  materials  was  assumed  to  be  perfect.  The 
absorption  coefficient  of  laser  irradiation on  steel 
was  adjusted  to  the  experimental  results  and 
approximated  as  40   temperature-independent. 
The main contribution to uncertainty regarding the 
readings comes from the high temperature gradient 
at the steel-explosive interface discussed next. 
For the experiment at a laser power of 1 kW 
the  numerical  mesh  resembling  the  experimental 
probe and temperature contours at different times 
are shown in Fig. 10. The low heat conductivity of 
Composition  B  leads  to  a  strong  temperature 
gradient  in  the  explosive  material.  Over  the 
diameter  of  the  thermocouple  measuring  0.5 mm 
the  interval  of  simulated  temperatures  measures 
interpreted  as  admissible 
experimental  uncertainty  for  the  comparison  of 
experimental and numerical temperature readings. 
These readings are plotted in Fig. 11. Besides the 
reading  each  plot 
temperature  curves 
corresponding  to  the  front  middle  and  rear 
position  of  the  thermocouples  cross  section  in 
order  to  illustrate  the  experimental  uncertainty. 
The experimental result matches the simulation up 
to about 60 s. Then at 200 C and more than 20 s 
increases  faster  than  predicted  by  the  simulation. 
This is probably due to the beginning of significant 
reaction near the thermocouple.  
Fig. 10 Mesh and temperature contours of thermal 
non-reactive  Composition  B  simulation  at  1  kW 
laser power coming from the left underlining low 
heat conductivity of explosive. 
Composition B samples we compare our results to 
published  data  obtained  from  traditional  thermal 
explosion  experiments  like  the  One-Dimensional 
Arrhenius  plot  in  Fig. 12.  Showing our  results  in 
the same plot as classic thermal ignition tests shall 
help  with  the  interpretation  of  the  new  results 
while keeping in mind some major differences of 
ODTX  to  the  presented  laser  experiments.  First 
for  ODTX  the  explosive  sample  is  heated  from 
room  temperature  using  a  constant  temperature 
boundary  condition   
the  predefined  critical 
temperature  for  which  a  time  to  explosion  is 
measured  instead of a constant heat flux coming 
from  the  laser  disregarding  effects  of  varying 
absorptivity.  Second  the  heat  flux  is  uniformly 
distributed  over  the  samples  surface  for  ODTX 
while laser irradiation leads to a local energy flux. 
Third  the  volume  of  the  ODTX  sample  being  a 
0.5 inch diameter sphere is approximately 60 times 
smaller.  This  leads  to  the  assumption  that  in  the 
laser experiments the spatial temperature gradient 
is steeper and hence that the ignition temperature 
is higher at a comparable time to explosion.  
Fig. 12 also comprises Seismoplast results that 
show  more  scattering  and  two  unexpectedly  low 
explosion temperatures below 150 C probably for 
the  same  reason.  As  discussed  before  the  higher 
temperatures  of  up 
to  500 C  are  not  all 
Fig.  11  Experimental  and  numerical  temperature 
Composition B at 1 kW laser power. 
the  experimental  results 
indicates that the presented setup is well suited for 
the measurement of the temperature increase in the 
explosive sample. For the further discussion of the 
measured  ignition  temperatures  and  times  for  the 
Fig. 12 Arrhenius plot showing measured time to 
explosion  vs.  inverse  critical  temperature  in  an 
illustrative  comparison  to  classic  ODTX  tests12 
gained  however  under  different  conditions.  Low 
temperature results to the right of the ODTX curve 
were  not  expected  and  are  interpreted  as  shifted 
thermocouple position. 
Summary and Conclusions 
An  experimental  setup  for  the  quantitative 
measurement  of  pressure  and  temperature  in 
confined explosive samples during laser irradiation 
was  developed.  Experimental  data  obtained  from 
two  explosives  Composition  B  and  Seismoplast 
at different laser powers between 1 kW and 5 kW 
are presented. The measured ignition times follow 
a clear trend as a function of laser intensity and are 
similar for both explosives. The temperature at the 
interface between the shell and the explosive in the 
parameter  for  the  evaluation  of  the  experiments 
since it represents the maximum temperature in the 
explosive material. The initial rate of temperature 
increase  measured  at  this  position  is  in  good 
agreement with FEM simulations solving the heat 
conduction  equation  in  the  sample.  After  some 
time  a  faster  temperature  increase  is  observed  in 
some experiments which may be explained by the 
onset of reaction and thus of a significant amount 
of  heat  production  in  the  explosive  material.  For 
the  measured  ignition  temperatures  relatively 
large  fluctuations 
the  results  of  different 
experiments  were  observed  indicating  that  the 
position  of  the  tip  of  the  thermocouple  might  be 
moving at this stage of the interaction. A modified 
sample  setup  is  currently  being  prepared  for  a 
more  stable  positioning  of  the  thermocouple  in 
future experiments. 
In  addition  the  pressure  build-up  inside  the 
sample  could  be  measured  by  piezo-electric 
pressure  transducers.  In  the  experiments  the 
pressure  initially  remains  close  to  zero  and  then 
continuously  increases  after  a  specific  delay  and 
with a specific rise time up to the point of ignition. 
This  observation  is  in  qualitative  agreement  with 
the model calculations presented in this paper.  
Typical time scales of the measured pressure 
rise  time  are  of  the  order  of  milliseconds  for 
Composition B and seconds for Seismoplast. The 
reason for this difference is not yet understood and 
is  subject  of  future  experiments  with  a  modified 
setup of the pressure gauge.  
experimental  observation  requires  the  numerical 
simulation  of  the  thermo-mechanical  reaction  of 
the irradiated sample. As a first approach we have 
carried  out  simulations  that  take  into  account  the 
energy  absorption  of  the  laser  and  calculate  the 
heat  conduction  in  the  multi-phase  sample.  For  a 
more  comprehensive  simulation 
kinetics  of  the  explosive  material  has  to  be 
this  end  we  have  set  up  a 
computational  material  model  that  calculates  the 
thermo-mechanical  response  of 
material  based  on  an  Arrhenius  model  for  the 
reaction  kinetics  and  a  mixing  rule  for  the 
explosive  material  and  reaction  products.  The 
implementation of this reactive material model in a 
hydrocode simulation is currently under progress.  
The  final  goal  of  this  work  is  to  benchmark 
the numerical models with the experimental results 
and  to  develop  the  capability  of  predicting  the 
response of explosives under laser irradiation. 
We  acknowledge  financial  support  by  the Dual Fragment Impact 
Peter J Haskins Richard I Briggs and David W Leeming 
15 Armstrong Street Ridsdale Hexham Northumberland UK NE48 2TN 
Ordnance Test Solutions Ltd. 
Abstract.  To  explore  the  potential  hazard  posed  by  multiple  fragment  strikes  we  have 
developed the capability to launch 2 fragments from the same gun a 30mm powder gun 
at a range of velocities and achieve impacts on an acceptor charge with good control over 
the spatial and temporal separation of the strikes. Typically in the work to date we have 
used 12.7mm diameter steel spheres ball bearings as the projectiles and concentrated on 
achieving a spatial separation of 20-30mm and a temporal separation of ca. 100-200s. 
We  have  used  this  dual  launch  system  to  conduct  firings  against  explosive  filled  test 
charges. Results of these tests have clearly indicated the potential for detonation upon the 
second  strike  at  velocities  well  below  those  needed  for  shock  initiation  by  a  single 
fragment. In this paper we describe the experimental techniques we have used the results 
obtained and discuss the likely mechanisms controlling the target response. 
Fragment impact can pose a significant hazard 
to  many  weapons  systems  warheads  and  rocket 
motors.  Fragments  can  come  in  a  wide  range  of 
shapes  sizes  and  velocities  and  in  the  case  of  a 
nearby  detonation  multiple  strikes  are  highly 
likely. Currently vulnerability to fragment impact 
is normally assessed according to STANAG 4496. 
This  testing  regime  employs  a  single  14.3mm 
diameter 160 degree conical tipped steel projectile 
at either 1830ms or 2530ms depending upon the 
perceived threat scenarios. Testing to consider the 
potential  threat  from  multiple  fragment  strikes  is 
sometimes carried out using the FRAGMAT test 
which  projects  steel  cubes  at  the  target  using  an 
explosive  donor.  This  test  is  difficult  to  conduct 
and due to the random nature of the strikes it is not 
particularly suitable for a fundamental study of the 
mechanisms governing target response.   
It  was  considered  that  an  initial  fragment 
strike or strikes could sensitise a weapon system 
to  subsequent  impacts  which  may  then  lead  to  a 
more  violent  reaction  than  would  have  been 
predicted  based  on  single  fragment  studies.  In 
particular  it  seemed  likely  that  the  possibility  of 
detonation  via  and  XDT  X  for  unknown 
Detonation  Transition  or  DDT  Deflagration  to 
Detonation  Transition  process  may  well  be 
increased  under  multiple  as  opposed  to  single 
impact.  Consequently  to  explore  this  potential 
hazard we have developed a dual fragment launch 
capability and used this system to conduct firings 
against  explosive  filled 
following  section  we  describe  the  experimental 
techniques we have used both to achieve the dual 
fragment launch and observe the acceptor charge 
We  have  developed  a  dual  fragment  launch 
capability  based  upon  a  30mm  powder  gun.  To 
date  we  have  concentrated  on  launching  12.7mm 
diameter steel spherical fragments which we have 
housed in Tufnol sabots. The two sabotsfragments 
are  loaded  into  the  gun  barrel  one  immediately 
behind the other. The sabot employed for the rear 
fragment  differs  from  the  front  sabot  in  having  a 
groove  machined  along  the  length  of  its  outer 
surface.  This  groove  allows  propellant  gases  to 
accelerate the first sabotfragment slightly ahead of 
the  second  one.  By  changing  the  dimensions  of 
this  groove  different  temporal  separations  in 
fragment arrival can be achieved. The projectile is 
also very slightly offset in the rear sabot to provide 
a  spatial  separation  between  the  strikes.  Figure  1 
below illustrates the sabots and fragments. 
Fig. 1. Sabots and fragments. The rear sabot is on 
The  target  explosive  employed  to  date  has 
been  RDXTNT  6040  and  this  has  been  melt 
into  cylindrical  steel  charge  cases  and 
machined  flush  with  the  top  surface  of  the  steel 
cylinder. The steel cases had an internal diameter 
of  75mm  with  a  wall  thickness  of  5mm  and  a 
10mm  thick  base  plate.  The  front  face  through 
which  the  fragments  strike  could  be  varied  and 
was  attached  using  10mm  high  tensile  steel  tie 
bars  and  for  thin  cover  plates  a  steel  retaining 
collar  was  also  employed.  Figure  2  illustrates  a 
typical target charge. 
Events  were  viewed  using  two  high  speed 
video  cameras  operating  at  ca.  50000  and 
90000pps.  The  events  were  back  lit  using  flash 
bulbs  and  a  mirror  was  used  to  enable  an 
orthogonal view to be obtained thus allowing the 
spatial  separation  of  the  fragment  strikes  to  be 
measured and mapped. The slower framing camera 
observed  two  orthogonal  views  whilst  the  faster 
camera looked in detail at one view to study target 
reaction.  Fragment  velocities  just  before  strike 
were  obtained  from  the  video  records.  Figure  3 
illustrates the experimental set-up. 
Fig. 2. Target charge with aluminium front plate. 
Fig. 3. Charge stand showing overhead mirror for 
orthogonal viewing. 
To date we have conducted 35 firings against 
live RDXTNT charges and a considerable number 
of  additional  inert  tests  to  develop  the  fragment 
launch  system.  Tests  on  live  targets  have  been 
carried  out  with  steel  and  aluminium  front  cover 
plates  and  also  with  no  cover  plate  i.e.  bare 
explosive  surface.  In  the  following  sections  we 
summarise  the  results  obtained  concentrating  on 
the  key  experiments  in  which  detonation  occurs 
following the second fragment strike. 
 We  have  chosen  to  use  spherical  fragments 
for  this  initial  study  both  to  avoid  projectile 
stability issues and also to rule out the possibility 
of detonation occurring via a Shock to Detonation 
SDT mechanism. Previous work1 shows that the 
SDT  threshold  for  detonation  of  bare  RDXTNT 
for these fragments would be in the region of 1800 
-  2000ms  which  is  far  above  the  velocities  we 
have used in this study. 
We  have  carried  out  three  tests  against  bare 
target charges. In the first of these tests the second 
fragment struck the wall of the steel cylinder and 
consequently the test was deemed void. The other 
tests rounds 5 and 24 both resulted in detonation 
of the charge following the second fragment strike.  
temporal and spatial of the strikes for rounds and 
5  and  24  are  given  in  Table  1  and  the  spatial 
separations are illustrated in Fig. 4. 
Table 1. Data for rounds 5 and 24. 
fragment  velocities  and 
In  both  these  tests  there  is  little  reaction 
discernable  upon  the  strike  of  the  first  fragment 
but detonation breaks out shortly after the second 
strike.  Because  the  second  fragment  enters  the 
debris  cloud  of  ejected  explosive  it  is  difficult  to 
precisely  pinpoint  its  position  at  the  time  of 
detonation  but  interpolation  of  the  video  frames 
suggests  it  is  close  to  the  original  charge  face 
location. Figure 5 shows the recovered fragments 
following  detonation  in  round  24  and  Figure  6 
shows a sequence of frames from the video record 
for  round  5  note  that  each  frame  displays  two 
Fig.  4.  Projectile  strike  separations  Round  5   
19mm Round 24  25.9mm. 
Fig. 5. Recovered fragments from round 24. 
Aluminium Cover Plates 
Tests  have  been  carried  out  on  charges 
covered  with  both  1  and  2mm  aluminium  cover 
plates  to  determine  if  the  sensitisation  seen  with 
the  bare  charges  would  occur  for  thinly  cased 
munitions. In total 6 tests were carried out with a 
1mm  cover  plate  although  a  failure  of  the  flash 
system  meant  no  records  were  achieved  for  one 
test. Five tests were conducted with a 2mm cover 
plate but two of these were deemed void due to the 
second projectile striking the steel cylinder.   
The  data  for  the  five  valid  tests  with  1mm 
aluminium cover plates is given in Table 2. It can 
be  seen  that  for  these  five  tests  three  detonated 
following the second strike and two gave pressure 
burst reactions. The data for the 2mm cover plates 
is given in Table 3 from which it can be seen that 
two of the tests resulted in detonation and one in a 
                 t  -20s                                     t  0 first strike                                  t  20s 
                   t  120s                            t  260s second strike                 t  280s detonation    
Fig. 6.  Selected frames from the high speed video sequence for round 5. 
Table 2. Data for 1mm Al cover plates. 
Whilst some degree of stochastic behaviour is 
to be expected in phenomena such as XDT which 
are  dependent  on  damage  creation  there  does 
appear to be possible explanations for the different 
lesser response of rounds 25 and 30. In the case  
of round 25 the spatial separation between the two 
strikes  was  considerably  greater  than  in  the  other 
tests  and  this  may  have  resulted  in  the  second 
strike impacting material which was less damaged. 
Round 30 was deliberately fired at a lower velocity 
in  order  to  find  a  velocity  threshold.  Comparison 
with  the  other  results  for  bare  1  and  2mm 
aluminium cover plates suggests that the threshold 
for these thin-cased or bare charges is ca. 1100ms. 
Table 3. Data for 2mm Al cover plates 
Although  failing  to  detonate  the  response  of 
round 32 was an extremely violent pressure burst 
suggesting  that  it  was  very  close  to  transition  to 
temporal  separation  between  the  fragment  strikes 
there  is  no  obvious  explanation  for  the  lesser 
response of this test. In Figure 7 we show selected 
frames from the high speed video of round 26. 
t  133s  second strike 
Fig. 7. Selected frames from the high speed video 
sequence for round 26. 
As  with  the  bare  charges  the  detonations 
observed with  aluminium  covered  charges appear 
to break out very shortly after the second projectile 
is  estimated  to  have  struck  the  front  face  of  the 
charge.  Unlike  the  bare  charges  the  interaction 
between  the  steel  fragment  and  aluminium  cover 
plate  gives  rise  to  an  ignition  and  small  burn 
following the first strike. 
A number of tests have been carried out with 
steel cover plates of varying thickness maximum 
10mm to assess the possible vulnerability of more 
heavily  cased  munitions.  The  majority  of  these 
tests  have  given  rise  to  significantly  enhanced 
reaction upon the second strike but only one test 
round  11  with  a  10mm  steel  cover  plate  has 
resulted in a detonation. 
Selected  frames  from  the  video  sequence  of 
round  11  are  shown  in  Figure  8.  Unlike  the  bare 
and aluminium covered charges it can be seen that 
in round 11 there is a significant delay ca. 177s 
between  the  second  strike  and  the  onset  of 
detonation.  The  fragment  velocities  in  round  11 
were  1448  and  1406ms  and  the  separation 
between the strikes was 89s and 30.5mm. 
t  89s second strike 
Fig. 9. Selected frames from the high speed video 
sequence for round 11. 
A  number  of  previous 
investigated the phenomenon of XDT under single 
fragment impact23. Under single impact conditions 
it was found necessary for the charge to be free to 
expand and impact a secondary surface in order for 
detonation  to  occur.  The  central  cavity  in  some 
rocket  motors  can  make  them  vulnerable  to  this 
phenomenon  but  the  design  of  most  munitions 
prevents the occurrence of this mechanism. 
In  the  single  impact  XDT  experiments  the 
debris  cloud  of  explosive  was  seen  to  ignite  and 
undergo  transition  to  detonation  very  rapidly 
10s  upon  impact  with  the  secondary  surface 
and for the detonation to then propagate back into 
the  remainder  of  the  charge.  The  debris  cloud  in 
these  experiments  was  estimated  to  be  ca.  60 
theoretical  maximum  density  and  this  would 
rapid  convective  burn 
underwent a DDT akin to that observed in gases. 
In the experiments described here the second 
fragment  could  be  considered  as  replacing  the 
experiments. However in the current experiments 
with  either  bare  charges  or  thin  aluminium  cover 
plates  detonation  does  not  initiate  when  the 
second  fragment  strikes  the  ejected  debris  cloud 
but  when  or  shortly  after  it  strikes  the  charge 
face.  Despite  this  difference  it  is  probable  that  a 
similar XDT mechanism is operating. 
The  delayed  detonation  observed 
heavily confined round 11 test would appear to be 
the  result  of  a  different  mechanism.  Due  to  the 
heavy confinement it would seem more likely that 
this  is  a  conventional  DDT  process  occurring  in 
explosive  which  has  been  granulated  by  the 
We  believe  that  this  study  has  shown  that  a 
potential  detonation  hazard  exists  under  multiple 
fragment  impact  at  velocities  well  below  those 
needed  to  induce  detonation  under  single  impact 
conditions.  Thin  skinned  munitions  would  appear 
to  be  particularly  vulnerable  to  this  potential 
hazard  with  an  XDT  response  occurring  at 
velocities  well  below  those  required  for  SDT 
under a single impact. 
to  utilise  different 
We plan to continue this work to look at other 
capability to improve reliability and enable a wide 
range of projectiles to be employed.  In addition 
instrumentation  to  further  study  the  mechanisms 
operating under these conditions.  Investigating Colliding Shock Wave and Detonation Wave Interactions and their Influence 
Catherine E Johnson Joshua M Hoffman Braden T Lusk Neal Lee 
Department of Mining Engineering  
University of Kentucky Lexington KY 40506 
Nelson Brothers LLC 
888 Oakwood Road Charleston WV 25314 
Abstract.  The practice of dual initiation using precise timing from electronic detonators 
in boreholes is thought to be beneficial for increasing fragmentation at a desired location 
in the rock strata. This increased fragmenting ability is theorized to be brought about by 
the collision of detonation waves in the explosive column and by the increased energy 
liberation rate both of which are the result of dual initiation. In addition the collision of
shock waves from two adjacent blast holes is suggested to improve fragmentation at the 
point at  which the two shock waves meet and can be altered with precise timing. This 
paper  presents  the  results  from  scaled  laboratory  experiments  where  converging
detonation  waves  and  shock  waves  were  studied.Solid  concrete  masonry  units  were 
drilled  filled  with  explosives  and  blasted  both  by  means  of  dual  initiation  and  single 
initiation in one hole. The samples were instrumented using high speed videography and
analyzed  using sieve analysis to determine  fragmentation  distribution. Mach cones and 
their  associated  angles  were  investigated  based  on  detonation  time.  Precise  timing  of
detonation  is  thought  to  be  able  to  control  the  collision  of  shock  waves  when  strata
characteristics  are  understood  but  the  fundamentals  surrounding  the  collision  of  shock 
waves is controversial. 
pressure1. Since the introduction of precise timing 
using  electronic  detonators  many  mine  locations 
have  published  results  of  increased  fragmentation 
at their location.  Controversy arises as to whether 
the  collision  of  two  shock  waves  reflecting  and 
producing  an  outgoing 
expanding  gas  pressure  or 
accuracy  from  the  electronic  detonators  that  is 
Often  two  primers  are  used  both  at  the  top  and 
bottom of one blast hole in order to both speed up 
the detonation of the explosive column and collide 
the  detonation  wave  through  potentially  stronger 
strata  in  the  middle  of  the  bench  both  of  which 
improve fragmentation.  The locus of this collision 
through  millisecond  precision 
improve  fragmentation  during 
The theory of colliding detonation and shock 
blasting  of  rock  has  been  used  in  blast  design 
through  the  use  of  precise  timing  to  direct  the 
collision  within  stronger  rock  strata.      However 
due  to  the  nature  of  the  muck  pile  blasted 
material produced after a blast and the difficulty 
quantitative  evidence  to  support  this  theory  has 
proved difficult to attain.   As a blast detonates the 
rock  immediately  surrounding  the  blast  hole  is 
crushed  pressure  moves  radially  surrounding  the 
hole  consequently  producing  a  compressive 
followed  by  an  expanding  gas 
with timing of less than 2  milliseconds per  meter 
of burden6-10.  For this an increase in fragmentation 
is  a  smaller  P50  particle  size.    P50  is  the  size  in 
which 50 percent of particles pass. 
The interaction of stresses has been difficult to 
measure  as  the  pressure  that  builds  up  in  the 
borehole  depends  not  only  upon  explosive 
composition  but  also  the  physical  characteristics 
of the rock.  Strong competent rock will result in 
higher  pressures  than  weak  compressible  rock.  
Rossmanith12 discusses how the delay time wave 
speed  in  the  rock  mass  shape  of  the  wave  pulse 
and  acoustic  impedance  mismatch  have  become 
decisive parameters in modern day advanced blast 
design.      As  a  blast  hole  detonates  it  creates  a 
leading  compressive  pulse  and  a  trailing  tensile 
pulse  the  length  of  this  is  dependent  on  the 
explosive  type  and  type  of  rock.      The  sonic 
velocity  can  vary  between  6560  feet  per  second 
fts  2000  meters  per  second  ms  for  soft 
sandstone  to  21320  fts  6500ms  for  granite.   
When  two  adjacent  blast  holes  of  spacing  s  are 
considered the elementary event is the interaction 
between  the  two  stress  waves  P1-P2  S1-S2  P1-S2 
and S1-P2.   In the close vicinity of the blast the P 
and  S  waves  will  overlap  but  will  separate  with 
distance from the blast due to their varying speeds. 
Figure 1 shows the interaction when two holes are 
detonated simultaneously.   
timing  of  initiation  using  electronic  detonating 
systems.      This  paper  presents  laboratory  scale 
tests which begin to examine these underexplored 
Theory of Detonation and Shock Waves 
the  borehole  wall 
Upon  detonation  of  a  blast  column  a  strong 
shock wave is emitted this quickly decays into an 
elastic  stress  and  in  the  far  field  responsible  for 
initial ground vibrations23.  When the shock wave 
process begins.  This shock wave which starts out 
at  the  velocity  of  detonation  of  the  explosive 
decreases quite rapidly once it enters the rock and 
in a short distance is reduced to the sonic velocity 
of that particular rock.  At those areas surrounding 
the blast column radial cracks form after a small 
delay.    The  formation  of  these  cracks  is  due  to  a 
interaction  of  a  number  of  waves 
propagating  arresting  and  re-mobilizing  upon 
collision with another wave or free face.   
The outgoing shockwave travels through these 
cracks radially creating a tangential stress.   This 
pressure is compressive but  since rock  is  weaker 
in  tension  it  is  the  trailing  portion  of  wave  and 
reflections  that  typically  cause  the  rock  to  break.  
When the stress reaches a free face it reflects back 
due  to  the  change  in  density  as  a  tensile  wave 
causing  further  breakage4.  When  two  of  these 
waves  collide  and  no  free  face  is  present  the 
rarefaction  waves  will  meet 
magnitude  forming  cracks.    This  theory  is  based 
on experimentation in air quantification of this in 
geomaterials is difficult to attain.  Yamamoto et al1 
state  that  when  considering  two  adjacent  blast 
holes  maximum  fragmentation  is  achieved  in  the 
sections  between  the  blast  holes  where  the  two 
tensile  trailing  sections  of  the  blast  waves  meet.   
They  propose  that  for  simultaneously  detonating 
charges  this  happens  at  the  mid-section  of  the 
spacing of these blast holes for a delayed charge it 
occurs  away  from  the  centerline.    Due  to  the 
supersonic  speed  of  a  shockwave 
between  two  adjacent  holes  would  have  to  be 
almost  instantaneous  for  this  interaction  to  occur. 
Numerous  results  have  however  been  published 
stating  that  a  reduction  in  fragmentation  occurs 
                                                           
Experimental Investigation  
Three  separate  small  scale  lab  tests  were 
carried  out  during  the  investigation  in  order  to 
explore  the  effects  of  colliding  detonation  and 
shock  waves  through  strata.      Identical  solid 
concrete  masonry  blocks  were  used  for 
experiments  with  a  density  of  150  pounds  per 
cubic  foot  lbft3  and  compressive  strength  of 
10000 psi.   The blocks were 15x7 x7 inches 
in  size.    Detonating  cord  containing  PETN  with 
strength of 50 grainsfoot grft was the explosive 
initiated  using  25 
millisecond ms surface delays.   Each block was 
drilled  through  the  center  in  accordance  with  the 
specific  test  color  coded  and  painted  in  the 
middle third for clarity.  
One  block  from  each  test  was  recorded  on 
high speed video at 250 frames per second.   The 
remaining tests  were  wrapped in  geotextile  fabric 
and  chicken  wire  to  contain  the  fragments  for 
further analysis before a final layer of door screen 
wire was applied Fig. 3.         
Test 1- Single initiation 
inches.  The  diameter  of 
Six  blocks  were  drilled  through  the  center  down 
the  full  15  inch  side  length.      The  bit  size  was 
detonating  cord  was  0.185  inches  leaving  the 
explosive  slightly  decoupled  within  the  drilled 
hole.      A  3  ft    length  of  50  grft  detonating  cord 
was cut and thread through the drilled hole zip ties 
were placed at each end to prevent the cord from 
Fig.1  Lagrange  diagram  showing  interaction  of 
stress  waves  emerging  from  two  simultaneously 
detonated blast holes After Rosmannith 2003.   
the  greatest  magnitude 
If  the  detonation  of  the  second  wave  is 
delayed the above regimes will move closer to the 
delayed  blast  hole  consequently  controlling  the 
fragmentation  pattern.    Conversely  if  the  stress 
waves  occur  in  the  center  of  the  two  blast  holes 
potential  for  fragmentation  is  increased.    Longer 
wave  pulses  can  also  be  obtained  using  an 
explosive  with  a  lower  velocity  of  detonation 
VoD and brisance.  These explosives are usually 
associated  with  larger  volumes  of  produced  gas 
which  will  also  positively  affect  fragmentation 
generating differing opinions on the precise cause 
of the enhanced fragmentation.  It is also important 
to  note  that  discussion  by  Rosmannith  2003  is 
based  on  a  model  with  no  experimental  data  to 
experimentation and unpredictability of results.      
the  complex  nature  of 
Fig. 2 Sequence of block preparation 
moving.    Five of the blocks  were  wrapped three 
times  in  geotextile  fabric  and  three  times  in 
chicken  wire to contain the  fragments.  The third 
block was left unwrapped to record on high speed 
video.   A 25 ms surface delay was secured to the 
end  of  the  detonating  cord  and  detonated  using  a 
remote fire triggering system.  The powder factor 
for  Test  1  was  0.46  pounds  explosive  per  cubic 
yard lbyd3 in the ideal range of 0.25-0.5 lbyd3 
for  a  boulder  shot13.    The  blocks  were  painted 
green and collected samples will be referred to as 
samples T1a through T1e.  Fig. 3 shows the test 1 
Fig. 4 Test 2 layout 
Test 3  Dual initiation Colliding Shock Waves   
Fig. 3 Test 1 layout 
Blocks for Test 3 were only drilled one third 
of the way from each end of the block leaving the 
middle third in tact with no drill-hole or explosive 
present  in  order  to  gauge  the  interaction  of  the 
shockwaves through the solid concrete.   Two 3 ft 
lengths of detonating cord were cut and secured to 
each end.   The powder factor for these shots was 
recommended range.   Nine blocks were examined 
for  this  test  due  to  inconsistency  of  some  of  the 
results.    Blocks  T3a  through  T3h  were  painted 
pink wrapped in fabric and wire for analysis and a 
final  block  left  for  recording  on  the  high  speed 
video camera.   Figure 5 shows the Test 3 setup.   
lbyd3  but  still  within 
Test  2    Dual  initiation  Colliding  Detonation 
Fig. 5 Test 3 layout 
The  blocks  for  Test  2  were  prepared  in  the 
same  manner  as  Test  1  and  drilled  down  the  full 
length  of  the  specimen.      A  6  ft  length  of 
detonating  cord  was  cut  thread  and  secured 
through  the  drilled  hole  leaving  the  exact  same 
excess at each end of the block  giving a powder 
factor  of  0.46  lbyd3.  The  surface  delay  was 
secured  to  both  ends  of  the  detonating  cord  for 
simultaneous  detonation  and  the  collision  of  the 
detonating waves through the center of the block.  
Again five blocks were wrapped and one left open 
for use with the high speed video camera.   Blocks 
for  Test  2  were  painted  orange  and  samples  T2a 
through T2e retained for further analysis.  Figure 4 
shows the test 2 configuration.  
Timing effects were also investigated for Test 
3.    The  timing  difference  was  based  on  differing 
lengths of detonating cord either side of the block. 
Differences of 2 4 and 6 inches were investigated.  
Two blocks for each difference were  wrapped for 
fragmentation analysis. 
The collected samples were taken back to the 
lab  and  unwrapped  carefully  to  preserve  any 
evidence  of  tensile  cracking.      Particle  sizes 
smaller than one and a half inches were processed 
using  a  series  of  sieves.    Larger  particles  were 
placed on a work bench with a scale and a picture 
to  use  with  WIPFRAG  photographic 
fragmentation analysis software.     
Results and Discussion 
A visual analysis of the blocks was carried out 
after  the  tests.    The  fabric  and  chicken  wire  was 
successful  in  containing  all  fragments.    Figures  6 
and 7 show the tensile breakage from Tests 1 and 
2 respectively.  Test 3 is analyzed separately due 
to the difference in powder factor from tests 1 and 
respectively.  Test  2  where  detonation  waves 
collided through the center of the block clearly has 
a straight horizontal crack at this point.  Test 1 has 
vertical tensile cracks expanding radially from the 
detonation  source  and  used  as  a  control  test.  
Figure 8 shows the top of the block demonstrating 
the  textbook  radial  cracking.  Initial  observations 
agree  with  the  theory  that  addition  cracks  will 
form  at  the  point  where  two  detonation  waves 
meet  if  top  and  bottom  initiation  were  used. 
Fragmentation  analysis  was  used  to  determine 
whether  this  aided  fragmentation  or  created  an 
early  vent  for  the  gas  pressure  to  escape  and 
Fig. 7 Tensile cracks from Test 2 
 Fig. 8 Radial cracking on top of block.   
Table 1 Fragmentation analysis for Tests 1 and 2  
Fig. 6 Tensile cracks from Test 1 
Colliding Detonation
Mean Particle Size in 
Fig. 9 Average percent passing for tests 1 and 2 
Table 1 shows the results from the sieve and 
photographic  fragmentation  analysis  for  Tests  1 
and  2.  Figure  9  shows 
distribution  as  a  bar  plot.      Results  of  blasting 
practices  are  typically  either  ore  fed  through  a 
series  of  crushers  and  grinders  for  processing  or 
overburden moved by truck and shovel in the most 
cost effective  way possible.  For processing p80 
the  probability  of  80  passing  a  given  particle 
size  is  typically  used  for  design  and  efficiency.  
Truck and shovel time studies show a uniform size 
range not too big to pick up in the bucket or too 
small to fall out while the shovel is swinging are 
most cost beneficial.  Table 2 shows the P80 and 
percent of the distribution that falls between a 4 in 
and 8 inch sieve.  It can be seen that Test 2 where 
two detonation waves collide within the block has 
both  a  lower  P80  size  and  higher  percentage 
falling  in  the  range  between  4  and  8  inches. 
Although  the  differences  in  fragmentation  are 
minor in this small test scaling this up to a large 
scale  operation  can  result  in  high  cost  savings 
annually  and  evidence  that  initiating  the  top  and 
bottom of a borehole could increase fragmentation.   
Table 2 Analysis for Tests 1 and 2 
Two  of  the  blocks  for  test  3  representing 
colliding  shockwaves  can  be  seen  in  figures  10 
and 11.  Repeatability of the test was not as good 
as  with  tests  1  and  2.    4  of  the  blocks  resemble 
figure 10 with a clear horizontal crack through the 
block  where  no  explosives  are  present  and  4 
resemble figure 11 where a large block remains in 
the center section.  Explanation for this is difficult 
to quantify at this stage but as a common design 
practice  to  expect  increased  fragmentation  in  the 
center  section  of  two  blast  holes  is  not  reliable.  
Further  investigation  into  colliding  shock  waves 
was  carried  out  through  Mach  angle  analysis  and 
timing  differences  by  varying 
detonating cord with side of the block.    
Table 3 and Figure 13 show the fragmentation 
analysis for test 3. An average from the tests was 
taken  for  simultaneous  detonation  as  well  as  the 
differences  in  timing.    There  were  no  horizontal 
cracks  throughout  any  of  the  blocks  where  shock 
waves  would  have  met. 
significant  differences  are  apparent  from  the 
fragmentation results when different timings were 
applied.    This  could  be  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
shock wave would have already passed though the 
block  when  the  second  hole  is  detonated.    Exact 
VoD  measurements  can  be  taken  to  confirm  this.  
The angled cracks formed in this test could be due 
to the expanding conical shock wave or Mach cone 
the  detonation  wave.  The  small 
triangular  pieces  that  have  broken  off  from  the 
edges of the block form due to the reflected tensile 
stress  at  the  free  face.    The  point  at  which  this 
occurs could be predicted if the interaction of the P 
and  S  stress  waves  within  the  strata  could  be 
calculated and applied to a similar model to that in 
Figure 12 shows a Mach angle calculation to 
accompany  Equation  1.    When  the  equation  was 
applied to the manufacturers detonating cord VoD 
of 23000 fts an average Mach angle came out as 
21.  The measured angle after detonation was 23. 
Measuring  the  exact  VoD  of  the  detonating  cord 
would  make  this  comparison  more  reliable  but 
gives confidence that it is the shockwave that has 
collided  and  resulted  in  tensile  cracks.      is  the 
mach angle v the detonation wave velocity and a 
the sonic velocity.  
cid2201cid1861cid1866cid586 cid3404
Fig. 12 Mach angle applied to one of the blocks  
Fig. 10 Center tensile crack from test 3  
Fig. 11 Tensile cracks from test 3.    
Table 3 Fragmentation analysis for Test 3.  
Mean Particle Size in 
Fig. 13 Average percent passing for test 3.  
Analyzing  the  high  speed  video  recordings 
generated interesting results.  Figure 14 shows all 
three tests 4 ms after detonation.   Test 1 shows a 
single vertical crack down the center of the block.  
Test  2  again  has  the  visible  crack  through  the 
vertical height of the block.  Due to the bright light 
from  the  exposed  detonating  cord  the  center 
section of the block is difficult to analyze and no 
tangible conclusion can be made.  Test 3 shows an 
additional  horizontal  crack  is  visible  across  the 
middle  width  of  the  block  where  no  explosives 
were present but at the exact point where the shock 
waves would collide.   
Fig. 14 High Speed Video screen capture after 4 ms Left to Right Test 1 Test 2 Test 3 
Fracture Mechanics. Kluwer Academic Press. 
Broek  D.  1988  The  Practical  Use  of 
Fragmentation. J.Wiley  Sons. 
Clark  G.B.  1987  Principles  of  Rock 
Cook M.A. 1974. The Science of High 
Explosives.  IRECO  Chemicals  Salt  Lake  City 
electronic delay detonators. Fragblast 33-24. 
Yamamoto  M.  1999  Experimental  and 
smooth  blasting  with 
Katsabanis P.D. and Liu L.1996. Delay 
Requirements  for  Fragmentation  Optimization. 
Measurement  of  Blast  Fragmentation.  Balkema 
Rossmanith  H.P.  2002.  The  Use  of 
Lagrangian  Diagrams 
Blasting  Part  I  Two  Interacting  Boreholes. 
FRAGBLAST  International  Journal  for  Blasting 
and Fragmentation. Vol. 6 No. 1 pp. 104-135 
Vabrabant  F.  and  Espinosa  A.  2006. 
Impact of short delays sequence on fragmentation 
by  means  of  electronic  detonators  theoretical 
validation.  Proc.  8th 
International  Symposium  on  Rock  Fragmentation 
by Blasting FRAGBLAST 8. pp. 236-331. 
Katsabanis  P.D.  Tawadrous  A.  Braun 
A. and Kennedy. C. 2006. Timing effects on the 
fragmentation  of  small  blocks  of  granodiorite. 
FRAGBLAST  International  Journal  for  Blasting 
and Fragmentation. Vol. 10 No 1-2 pp. 83-93 
Johanssom  D.  and  Ouchterlony  F. 
2013. Shock wave interactions in rock blasting  
the use of short delays to improve fragmentation in 
model-scale.  Rock  Mechanics 
Engineering. Vol. 46 1 pp. 1-18. 
Katsabanis P. O Omidi O. Rileo and P. 
Ross.  2014.  A  Review  of  Timing  Requirements 
for Optimization of Fragmentation. Proceedings of 
the  40th  Annual  Conference  on  Explosives  and 
Blasting Technique. Denver USA.  
Conclusion and Further Work  
The results presented in this paper show clear 
fragmentation  patterns  produced  when  shock 
waves  and  detonation  waves  collide.      Test  3  in 
the  region  where  no  explosive  was  present 
produced  a  visible  horizontal  crack  at  the  exact 
point where two the trailing tensile waves collide.  
While the expanding gas pressure that follows the 
shockwave will also have an effect on the overall 
fragmentation the gas can only follow cracks and 
nonexistent  in  the  solid  concrete  blocks  used  in 
this  study.      Test  2  where  detonation  waves 
collide  also  has  an  additional  visible  crack 
through  the  center  of  the  block  which  was  not 
present in the single initiated test.   Fragmentation 
analysis  has  also  shown  that  test  2  has  increased 
fragmentation over that of test 1.  
lines  already  present  but 
Fragmentation analysis could be improved by 
having a completely coupled explosive within the 
block.    The  degree  of  coupling  between  the 
explosive and the borehole wall will have an effect 
on  how  efficiently  the  shockwave  is  transmitted 
into the rock.   This could be achieved by drilling a 
smaller  diameter  hole  through  the  block  to  better 
match the detonating cord or couple with water.    
Changing  the  timing  for  Test  3  was  not 
successful  in  moving  the  location  of  the  central 
tensile  crack.  Since  the  hypothesis  by  Yamamoto 
et  al  1999  refers  to  additional  fragmentation  in 
the  space  between  two  parallel  boreholes  larger 
scale  tests  can  be  carried  out  resemble  this.  The 
fragmentation  analysis  has  worked  well  for  this 
small scale experiment and can be repeated going 
The experiment carried out has given evidence 
of  the  interaction  between  colliding  shock  and 
detonation  waves  through  small  scale  laboratory 
tests  but  with  it  has  opened  the  vast  potential  to 
further investigate this complex interaction.          Material Property Characterization of Thermally Damaged HMX-based 
Peter C. Hsu Elizabeth Glascoe Larry Fried H. Keo Springer and Jon L. Maienschein 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
Abstract. We recently conducted damage experiments on three HMX-based high explosives 
LX-10  LX-14  PBX-9501  and  characterized  the  effect  of  damage  on  handling  safety 
density porosity permeability and burn rate.  Thermal insults were applied to all 3 materials 
in  either  unconfined  or  partially  confined  conditions  with  a  pre-determined  temperature 
profile for several hours.  Porosity of the damaged sample was significantly increased which 
led to higher gas permeability and faster burn rate.  Burn rates of damaged PBX-9501 at 174 
oC were two to three orders of magnitude higher than those of pristine samples the same 
was  observed  for  damaged  LX-10.  In-situ  measurements  of  gas  permeability  at  high 
temperatures were made on LX-10 LX-14 and PBX-9501 samples and the results showed 
that the gas permeability increased by five orders of magnitude from 10-20 m2 to 10-15 m2.
Thermal exposures also increased the porosity to 3 - 4 at 150 oC and 5 - 7 at 174 oC
respectively.  Results also showed that LX-10 permeability and porosity data were slightly 
lower than those of LX-14 and PBX-9501 probably due to the use of the binder Viton A in 
the  formulation.  Small-scale  safety  tests  impact  friction  and  spark  showed  no 
sensitization when the damaged samples were tested at room temperature. 
than pristine samples.1 2 3 4  Materials after thermal 
exposure  expanded  significantly  became  much 
permeability  and  burn  rate.    We  have  found  that 
permeability  and  burn  rates  in  damaged  materials 
increased several orders of magnitude.5 6 7
recently  conducted 
experiments  on  3  HMX-based  formulations  LX10 LX-14 PBX-9501 that consist of 95 HMX 
and  5  binderplasticizer  and  characterized  the 
thermal  damage  on  some  material 
properties.  Results are presented in this paper. 
Incidents  caused  by 
fire  could  damage 
explosive  charges  in  either  confined  weaponry 
munitions  or  unconfined  pressed  parts  shape 
charges  or  powders  stored 
magazines bunkers ships environments that may 
affect  material  handling  safety  change  material 
properties and degrade its performance.  Therefore 
it  is  important  to  characterize  energetic  materials 
after thermal damage.  Methods of characterization 
include measurements of volume density porosity 
burn  rate  shock  sensitivity  impact  sensitivity 
Thermally  damaged  LX-04  HMX  85  Viton 
15  and  LX-17  TATB-based  formulation  had 
lower  detonation  velocities 
energy  densities  and  were  more  shock  sensitive 
Experiments and Results 
Thermal damage experiments were conducted in 
a  remote  control  cell.  The  process  conditions  were 
estimated from the thermal sensitivity data obtained 
from the ODTX one dimensional time to explosion 
system to ensure no thermal explosion would occur.8
Table 1 lists the times to explosion data for LX-10 
LX-14 and PBX 9501 and process conditions for the 
thermal  damage  experiments.  Afterward 
specimens  were  subsequently  characterized  for 
small-scale safety volume density porosity and gas 
permeability at ambient conditions.  
Table 2.  Small-scale safety test data 
Table  1.  ODTX  data  vs.  thermal  damage  process 
Values in parentheses represented damaged samples 
Porosity and Gas Permeability 
Pores  blind  pores  closed  pores  and  through 
pores exist in a high explosive material structure. 
A channel formed by the pores may start from one 
surface  and  terminate  inside  the  material.  Such 
pores are called blind pores. Blind pores influence 
the  amount  of  fluid  that  can  be  stored  in  the 
material. Blind pores contribute to  the  increase in 
surface area and the decrease in density.  When the 
pore is completely enclosed inside the material it 
is  called  a  closed  pore.    The  presence  of  closed 
pores  reduces  the  material  density  but  does  not 
contribute  to  flow  through  the  material.  The 
channels  that  extend  from  one  free  surface  of  the 
material  to  another  are  called  through  pores.  
Through  pores  are  responsible  for  fluid  flow 
  Through  pores  also 
contribute  to  the  increase  in  surface  area  and  the 
decrease  in  material  density.  For  sample  with 
known particle size Blake-Kozeny equation can be 
used  to  estimate  porosity  from  gas  permeability 
data.8 910 11 But when the material is under thermal 
insult its particle matrix may be distorted particle 
size may change and a direct measurement of gas 
permeability  in  a  permeation  system  is  the  only 
way to estimate the porosity in-situ.  Table 3 shows 
the  total  porosity    fraction  of  closed  pores  c
fraction  of  open  pores  o  and  gas  permeability  k 
for  pristine  PBX-9501  specimens.  These  data  are 
needed to establish a correlation between porosity 
and gas permeability. 
For pristine parts of various densities part 1 
6 8 10 and 12 fractions of open pores increased 
significantly  from  1.0  to  11.5  as  the  density 
decreased.  The open pores contributed to gas flow 
permeability  data.    Fig.  1  shows  the  correlation 
between  gas  permeability  and  fraction  of  open 
specimens  as  evident 
Small-scale Safety Tests 
We  conducted  thermal  damage  experiment  in 
the ODX heating system with the temperature profile 
similar  to  that  was  used  for  the  hot  permeability 
measurement  to  determine  whether  the  damaged 
samples would be safe to handle.  Table 2 shows the 
safety test data for 3 HMX-based formulations.  The 
material  changed  color  but  did  not  become  more 
sensitive after the thermal insults.   The impact test 
drop hammer results indicated the damaged sample 
became  somewhat  less  sensitive  to  impact  than 
pristine LX-10 probably because Viton after thermal 
exposure became soft and lubricated HMX particles 
more evenly similar results were observed for  LX04.  
pores  in  the  specimens.  It  is  a  useful  calibration 
curve for estimating porosity of heated PBX 9501 
samples under thermal insults.  
The correlation can be expressed by  
K  1.144 x 10-10 o 4.1569                                  1 
Where K  gas permeability m2
o     fraction  of  open  pores  measured  with  gas 
pycnometry in a method described previously.6
Permeability1.14410-10porosity4.1569
Fig. 2.  Gas permeability as a function of open 
porosity for PBX 9501. Dots represent 
experimental data and the line is from linear 
regression that correlates permeability and open 
Similar  permeability  measurements  were  made 
on  LX-10  and  LX-14  with  the  correlations  shown 
K  1.993 x 10-10 o 4.1193 2 for LX-10 
K  2.666 x 10-9 o 4.8823  3 for LX-14 
Gas Permeability Measurements In-situ at Elevated 
The pressed part was potted to a stainless 
steel holder in a radially-confined condition for gas 
permeability  measurements.    It  was  heated  up  at 
the ramp rate  of 1.2 Cmin to 174 C and soaked 
for several hours.  Gas permeability measurements 
were  made  before  heating  started  at  120  minutes 
of soaking and 220 minutes of soaking at 174 C
respectively.  Fig. 2 shows the PBX 9501 specimen 
Table 3. Gas permeability and porosity of pristine 
PBX 9501 samples TMD 1.855 gcc  
Fig. 2.  PBX 9501 sample with the sample holder 
after the heated gas permeability test at 174 C.
Figure 3 shows the temperature profile and gas 
permeability  data. 
  No  gas  permeation  was 
observed  with  the  pristine  PBX  9501  at  ambient 
temperature  before  heating  started.    The  sample 
was then heated up at a rate of 1.2 Cmin to 174 C
and  soaked  for  4  hours.    Gas  permeability  data 
were  1.4  x  10-15  m2  and  1.7  x  10-15  m2  at  120 
minutes  and  220  minutes  respectively.    The  test 
results  indicated  that  there  was  not  a  significant 
increase  in  gas  permeability  after  further  soaking 
from  120  minutes  to  220  minutes  at  174  C.
Possible  explanations  may  be  1  most  of  the 
BDNPA-F in the PBX 9501 already evaporated at 
the  end  of  120  minutes  soaking  2  phase 
transition  from  beta  to  delta  was  essentially 
completed.    The  increase  in  gas  permeability  and 
porosity  when  PBX  9501  sample  underwent 
thermal  insult  was  due  to  thermal  expansion 
evaporation of the BDNPA-F b.p. at 150 C and 
phase  transition  at  165  C.    In  an  attempt  to 
further  quantify  the  effect  of  evaporation  of 
BDNPA-F  on  the  increase  of  permeability  and 
porosity a second heated test was conducted on a 
separate pressed part.  We heated up the sample to 
150 C  and  soaked  it  at  150  C  for  134  minutes 
before  ramping  it  to  174  C.    The  temperature 
profile  permeability  and  porosity  are  shown  in 
Figure 4.  After soaking at 150 C for 134 minutes 
the  gas  permeability  increased  several  orders  of 
magnitude from below 10-20 m2 to 1.8 x 10-16 m2.
This is an indication of evaporation of BDNPA-F 
which  left  voids  in  the  sample  matrix  as  open 
porosity  increased  to  3.8  from  1.0.    Gas 
permeability  data  obtained  at  174  C  were  almost 
identical to those from first heated run on pressed 
part  1  an  indication  of  reproducibility  of  the 
Fig. 3.  Gas permeability at various temperatures for the radially-confined heated PBX 9501 specimen.  
Fig. 4.  Gas permeability and porosity evolution for heated LX-10 LX-14 and PBX 9501 at 150 C and 174 C.   
We also conduct thermal damage experiments 
on  LX-10  and  LX-14  using  similar  temperature 
permeability and porosity are shown in Fig. 4 and 
Table  4.  In  summary  thermal  exposure  increased 
the open porosity to 3 to 4 at 150 C and 5 to 
those  used  for  PBX-9501. 
7  at  174  C  respectively.  The  LX-10  data  was 
slightly lower than those of LX-14 and PBX-9501 
probably  due  to  the  use  of  Viton  A  in  the 
formulation.  Viton A is more thermally stable than 
Estane and BDNPA-F. 
Table 4.  Composition open porosity and permeability of 3 HMX-based Formulations 
permeability after thermal 
exposure at 150 C for 134 
permeability after thermal 
exposure at 174 C for 75 
permeability after thermal 
exposure at 174 C for 227 
Table 5.   Effect of sample confinement on permeability and porosity on PBX-9501 
holder radially
confined 
Stand alone pressed 
part free to expand  
Gas permeability m2  
measured at ambient 
measured at ambient 
measured at ambient 
in-situ measurement 
Effect of Confinement on Gas Permeability and 
Porosity Evolution Under Thermal Insults 
Material  composition  thermal  profile  and 
confinement contribute to the increase in porosity 
and  permeability.    The  effect  of  confinement  is 
shown in Table 5 for PBX-9501.  Sample 4 was 
thermally  damaged  externally  in  an  unconfined 
environment at 174 C for 2 hours cooled and then 
glued  to  a  sample  holder  for  gas  permeability 
measurements  at  ambient  temperature.    The  gas 
permeability  of  sample  4  was  significantly 
greater  than  those  of  samples    1  and  2  which 
were  glued  to  sample  holders  before  thermal 
damage.  During the thermal exposure sample 4 
was free to expand that resulted in higher porosity 
and permeability. Further study is needed to better 
quantify the effect of sample confinement. 
Burn Rate Measurement for Thermally Damaged 
thermal  damage  on  LX-10 
Burn rates were measured in the LLNL highpressure  strand  burner.    The  system  was  used  to 
followed by burn rate measurement at 150 oC and 
180 oC respectively in 2006 and the results were 
reported  elsewhere  6  12.    We  recently  made  burn 
rate  measurements  on  PBX-9501  at  150  oC  and 
173 oC  with  similar  temperature  profile  that  was 
used for the gas permeability measurement.   The 
results are shown in Fig. 5.  Both LX-10 and PBX9501  burned  several  orders  of  magnitude  faster 
than  pristine  samples  after  thermal  exposures 
above 170 C similar to the increases in porosity 
and gas permeability. 
Fig 5. Burn rates of pristine and thermally-damaged PBX-9501 at 150 C and 173 C triangle lines were 
burn rate for LX-10 at 150 C and 180 C.
recently  conducted 
experiments on LX-10 LX-14 and PBX-9501 and 
characterized  the  effect  of  damage  on  impact 
sensitivity  friction  sensitivity  spark  sensitivity 
density  porosity  permeability  and  burn  rate. 
Thermal exposures led to a significant increase in 
porosity  but  did  not  make  the  materials  more 
sensitive  to  impact  friction  and  spark  when  they 
tested  at  ambient 
permeation  measurement 
in  some  damaged  samples  was 
several  orders  of  magnitude  higher  than  that  in 
pristine materials.  We also measured burn rates of 
thermally  damaged  PBX-9501  in  a  strand  burner 
and found that its burn rates at 173 C were 2 to 3 
orders of magnitude faster than those of a pristine 
sample.  In summary we have found that damage 
changed some material properties significantly.  
We  would  like  to  thank  members  of  the 
Small-scale  safety  team  for  helping  with  the 
experiments.  Pressed parts were prepared by Sally 
Weber.  This research was partially supported by 
Joint  DoD-DOE  Munitions  Technology 
Development  Program.    Funding  from  the  HE 
Response Program is also greatly appreciated. This 
work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. 
Department  of  Energy  by  Lawrence  Livermore 
National  Laboratory  under  Contract  DE-AC5207NA27344. 
The  paper  has  been  reviewed  and  released  for 
public  audience  with  unlimited  distribution.    The 
LLNL  review  and  release  number  is  LLNLCONF-656227. Explosive Response to Pinch Arising from Low Speed Spigot Impact  
Christopher T. Hughes1 John P. Curtis1 John E. Reaugh2 and Andrew G. Jones1  
1 AWE Aldermaston Reading RG7 4PR UK  
2 LLNL Livermore CA 94551 USA  
Abstract. Safety is of principal importance during the handling processing and storage of 
explosives.  It  has  been  shown  in  previous  work  that  the  low  speed  spigot  impact  of 
consolidated Plastic Bonded Explosive is a significant threat. However the occurrence of 
ignition  and  growth  to  reaction  in  these  non-shock  impacts  is  difficult  to  predict.  An 
initial mechanical impact introduces a large amount of damage into the material bed in the 
form of cracks and increased porosity this damage leads to an increase in the surface area 
available for burning. This increase is difficult to measure during an experiment as the 
measurement relies on visual estimates which renders predictions of the burn difficult. To 
seek a better understanding of this issue an investigation has been made into the pinching 
of explosive moulding powder over a range of known particle sizes and packing densities 
in an idealised heavily confined cylindrical explosive bed. An embedded spigot struck by 
a projectile penetrates the cylindrical bed and initiates a small volume of the explosive 
through pinch at the far end of the cylinder. The resulting burn front then travels through 
the  explosive  bed  at  a  pressure-dependent  velocity  eventually  evolving  into  a 
Deflagration to Detonation DDT response. In this paper experimental results indicating 
the  threshold  spigot  impact  velocity  for  initiating  the  moulding  powder  in  this 
configuration  and  comparisons  of  the  explosive  burn  front  velocity  and  growth  to 
detonation are reported. Modelling of the reaction growth from ignition at the pinch point 
through laminar burning to detonation is undertaken using the High Explosive Reaction to 
Mechanical Stimulus HERMES model. The predicted burn front velocity is compared 
with the experimental results.  
Low  speed  impact  has  been  identified  as  a 
credible  ignition  source  that  can  occur  during 
accident  scenarios.  To  provide  evidence  based 
assessment  of  the  threat  posed  by  such  impacts 
work  has  been  ongoing  at  AWE  to  measure  the 
response  of  consolidated  explosives  to  low  speed 
spigot  impact  over  a  range  of  scales.  Work  has 
been reported previously on the impact response of 
High Explosives in the STEVEN test vehicle1 and 
in  a  spigot  intrusion  vehicle2  as  well  as  spigot 
impact  on  to  bare  unconfined  explosives3.  From 
the results of this work the reaction threshold for 
the  penetration  of  a 
consolidated bed can be estimated.  
In a spigot penetration type insult a large area 
of  un-quantified  damage  will  occur  along  the 
spigot penetration path. This damage manifests as 
deconsolidation  of  the  explosive  bed  and  an 
increase  in  the  porosity  of  the  material.  Once  an 
ignition  occurs  the  burn  front  will  then  move 
through  this  low  porosity  damaged  material.  It  is 
important to understand the growth of reaction in 
the  low  porosity  explosive  bed.  Building  on 
techniques  to  identify  the  growth  to  DDT  in 
powders when thermally initiated in steel tubes456 
this  work  has  been  extended 
mechanical initiation of this low porosity damaged 
material  and  the  subsequent  growth  to  a  violence 
reaction. Using sieved explosive moulding powder 
of differing sizes as an analogue for this damaged 
material  we  aim  to  characterise  the  ignition  and 
growth  of  reaction  in  low  porosity  beds  in  a  UK 
Material properties 
The  explosive  composition  studied 
cyclotetramethylene-tetranitramine  HMX  based 
plastic  bonded  explosive  all  samples  tested  used 
Bridgewater  HMX  Type  B  powder  which  has  a 
bimodal  particle  size  distribution  with 
predominant particle size of 140 um.  The HMX is 
prepared with a mixed binder of 1 Nitrocellulose 
and  8  K10  Liquid  plasticiser.  K10  is  a  mix  of 
Trinitroethylbenzene  and  Dinitroethylbenzene. 
The  moulding  powder  is  sieved  to  different  size 
fractions  Powder  A  measuring    1405  m  and 
Powder B at between 1405 and 2500 m prill size. 
Table 1 Material Compositions. 
Powder A  1405  HMX Type B 
The material packing density has been shown 
to have a significant impact on the DDT response 
inside  heavily  confined  tubes.  Increasing  the 
packing density from 53 to 99 TMD increases 
the Run distance by 4006. Burnside et al show a 
increase  of  50  in  the  run  distance  when  going 
from 65 to 85 TMD material. In other studies 
it  has  been  shown  that  the  level  of  confinement 
around  the  sample  will  have  a  significant  effect. 
X.G.Dai et al show an increase from 90 mm up to 
170 mm run distance when moving from a 13 mm 
to a 3 mm thick wall tube.  
Considering  earlier  work  the  test  vehicles 
were  based  on  a  25  mm  wall  thickness  tubes 
constructed  from  steel  or  Perspex  to  provide 
different  confinement  levels.  We  use  a  narrow 
range of densities around 50 TMD and vary the 
internal volume through different spigot diameters 
and particle sizes to vary the burn conditions. The 
ignition  under  impact  loadings  and  subsequent 
burn in the tube and transition to detonation within 
the tube length is recorded with high speed video 
cameras. Fibre optic probes embedded in the walls 
calculated.  Combined  with  the  high  speed  video 
footage blast overpressure measurements and post 
test fragment analysis are used to assign a metric 
the  burn  velocity 
Two designs of the impact vehicle have been 
tested  an  150  mm  vehicle  this  was  deemed  too 
short after initial experiments and extended to 300 
mm  Figure  1  to  capture  events  at  a  longer 
distance  from  ignition.  The  target  vehicle  is 
designed to maintain a significant confinement to 
the  powdered  material  in  order  to  drive  the 
pressure  build  up  inside  the  tube.  Both  vehicles 
consist  of  a  25mm  inner  diameter  25mm  wall 
thickness  mild  steel  tube  initially  internal  length 
of  the  tube  is  150  mm  in  the  first  vehicle  but 
extended  to  300  mm  in  the  second  vehicle.  The 
tube is closed at its bottom end with a steel plug. 
An interchangeable hardened steel spigot of radius 
6.35 or 20 mm initially and 9 12 or 15 mm in the 
second design is inserted on axis from the far end 
Fig 1. Cut away of the DDT Tube Design. 
The fixed standoff of the spigot from the end 
plug of 7mm was used in every case and together 
with the diameter of the spigot defines the volume 
of  pinched  explosive  ahead  of  the  spigot.  In  the 
case of the 6.35 mm diameter spigot the volume is 
200 mm3 this increases to 790 mm3 and 1240 mm3 
in  the  12  and  15  mm  spigots  cases  respectively. 
The powder was poured from the open end of the 
tube with the spigot in place and then sealed with 
the steel plug. In the pour density tests the powder 
was filled to the shoulder level and the tube sealed. 
In the case of the over 50 TMD tests the material 
was  lightly  tamped  down  after  filling  15g  of 
material. This allows a range of internal densities 
to be tested ranging from pour density 0.7 g.cm-3 
to a density of 1.2 g.cm-3 providing a theoretical 
porosity range of 0.32 to 0.61. 
To  drive  the  spigot  through  the  material  the 
head  of  the  spigot  is  impacted  by  a  1.5kg  mild 
steel  projectile  of  diameter  50mm  fired  from  a 
single stage smooth bore gas gun. The velocity of 
the  projectile  was  measured  via  two  wire  coils 
spaced 100 mm apart placed at the muzzle of the 
gas gun. This provides a reliable  muzzle velocity 
irrespective of the projectile shape. 
The  larger  vehicle  design  incorporated  fibre 
optic  probes  placed  at  intervals  of  28  mm  along 
the length of the tube to track the burn front as it 
progresses  down  the  length  of  the  tube  and  to 
allow  the  flame  shape  and  speed  to  be  analysed. 
The  fibres  are  monitored  via  high  speed  optoelectric  transducers  and  the  resultant  voltage 
recorded.  Expansion  of  the  tube  as  the  internal 
pressure  increases  was  captured  using  Phantom 
1610 High speed video cameras.  
Fig  2.  Picture  of  DDT  Impact  test  inside  the  test 
To improve the tracking of the burn front the 
experiment  has  been  repeated 
Perspex  tubes.  This  has  the  added  benefit  of 
reducing the level of material confinement around 
the powder. External blast overpressure gauges are 
positioned  at  between  1  and  1.4  m  around  the 
vehicle  to  capture  the  violence  of  the  event.  Post 
event  fragment  analysis  is  used  to  give  an 
indication  of  the  violence  of  the  reaction  of  the 
response  in  the  material.  To  identify  the  run 
distance  to  an  event  the  external  condition  of  the 
spigot  is  used.  An  initial  change  in  the  colour  of 
the spigot surface from a smooth shiny surface to a 
section  of  heavily  pitted  material  indicated  the 
change  in  the  reaction  type  from  a  burn  to  a 
High  Explosive  Response 
MEchanical  Stimulus7  has  been  developed  to 
predict  the  explosive  response  to  low  speed 
impact. At AWE HERMES has been implemented 
as a material model in the Lagrangian LS-DYNA 
Finite Element FE code8.  
The  HERMES  model  comprises  several  sub 
models including a constitutive model for strength 
porosity  and  surface  area  through  fragmentation 
an  ignition  model  an  ignition  front  propagation 
model  and  a  model  for  burning  after  ignition. 
Thermal effects are not yet explicitly modelled. In 
the  model  ignition  is  either  based  on  a  purely 
mechanical criterion depending on a time integral 
of  a  function  of  the  shear  equivalent  stress 
pressure and strain or can be specified at locations 
of the users choice. It is this option that has been 
selected to represent the initial ignition by pinch in 
The modelling of the spigot pinch experiment 
poses considerable challenges. The spigot pinches 
the explosive powder ahead of it forcing some of it 
sideways  and  compacting  and  shearing 
explosive  in  the  vicinity.  Modelling  the  spigot 
impact  experiments  is  not  straight  forward  in  the 
region  of  the  pinch  where  there  is  very  extreme 
The main aim of the modelling activities was 
to model the growth of reaction. It was decided not 
to model the pinch and hence the ignition process 
to  avoid  the  problems  associated  with  the  mesh 
distortion. Therefore it was assumed that the spigot 
and  the  steel  plug  were  not  deformed  by  the 
In the simulations the explosive was ignited 
around the circular edge of the spigot. This has the 
advantage  of  starting  the  calculation  with  an 
undistorted  mesh.  For  the  modelling  feasibility 
study  this  assumption  was  considered  to  be 
acceptable.  It  was  recognised  that  the  severity  of 
the  deformation  may  well  cause 
multiple sites and selection of a single ignition site 
may  greatly  underestimate  the  initial  reaction 
violence and the rapidity with which it propagates. 
However  once  ignited  it  is  believed  that  the 
progress of the burn front will depend decreasingly 
on  the  initial  site  or  region  of  ignition  and  that 
some insight into the progress of the burn may still 
be  gained  by  taking  this  simplified  modelling 
The  preliminary  calculations  show  that  the 
ignition at the periphery of the front of the spigot 
can lead to a slow burn. This spreads back up the 
explosive  around  the  spigot  until  mesh  distortion 
halts the run at approximately 610 s. 
Fig 3. Pressure contours at 609 Ps the final time 
before  onset  of  severe  mesh  distortion.  The 
maximum pressure is 0.128 Mbar or 12.8 GPa. 
Figure  3  shows  the  pressure  contours  just 
before  at  609  s  when  the  mesh  is  still  only 
slightly  distorted.  A  pressure  of  0.128  Mbar  or 
12.8  GPa  has  been  attained  i.e.  well  below  the 
detonation pressure of 30 GPa typically seen for 
Fig 4. Burn contours in explosive at 609 s. The 
maximum burn is 1.0 i.e. fully burnt.  
the  corresponding  burn 
contours  the explosive is reacting violently from 
near zero to fully reacted as the wave front passes. 
There is no visible backward moving wave. Figure 
5  shows  the  velocity  component  in  the  axial 
direction.  The  calculated  wave  velocity  is  about 
approximately 1.5 km.s-1 seen in the experiment. 
colour  change  occurred  at  127  mm  along  the 
length  of  the  spigot  from  the  impact  end  from  a 
shiny  to  a  dull  finish  with  a  further  change  to 
heavily  pitted  surface  at  131  mm  onwards 
indicating  the  start  of  a  violent  reaction  at  this 
distance. Coupled with the fragments at this point 
along  the  tube  Fig  6  it  was  judged  that  a 
detonation occurred at a distance of 127-131 mm. 
Fig 6. Fragments from 20 mm spigot impact on 
Experimental results 300 mm Steel Vehicle 
The longer 300 mm tube design incorporated 
the embedded fibre optics which allowed the burn 
front to be tracked down the tube.  
Table 2 Results from 150 mm long steel with 20 
127-131  DDT late in the tube 
may be affected by the 
proximity of the end 
59 -67  DDT early in the tube  
When  using  powder  B  a  DDT  type  response 
was  recorded  the  same  colour  changes  on  the 
spigot  occured  at  59  -  67  mm  respectively 
indicating that increasing the material particle size 
under the same conditions decreased the growth to 
detonation distance by 67 mm or 53 . 
Fig 5. Contours of velocity in the axial direction at 
609 Ps the final time before onset of severe mesh 
distortion.  The  maximum  is  2.1  km.s-1  which 
exceeds the observed speed of 1.5 km.s-1. 
The initial calculations described above were 
performed with a relatively coarse mesh to assess 
the  modelling  approach  the  calculations  are  in 
qualitative agreement with the experimental results 
and  provided  confidence 
Experimental results 
Eighteen experiments have been undertaken to 
investigate the response of the material to impact 
stimulus. Nine experiments with the short 150 mm 
tube length and a further seven with a longer 300 
mm tube two experiments with the 300 mm tube 
have been undertaken with the Perspex material. 
Experimental results 150 mm Steel Vehicle 
Using  the  smaller  design  with  a  6.35  mm 
spigot  no  ignitions  were  noted  in  the  impact 
velocity  range  of  66.8    106  m.s-1  there  was  no 
damage recorded to the outside of the vehicle. The 
volume of powered material trapped ahead of the 
spigot  during  the  impact  appeared  insufficient  to 
ignite  a  steady  burn  in  the  tube  even  under  the 
highest impact velocity.  
Increasing  the  spigot  diameter  to  20  mm 
induced a violent response from the material at an 
impact speed of 105m.s-1. This impact speed was 
subsequently used in all tests as a standard impact 
velocity.  Inspecting  the  colour  changes  on  the 
spigot length Table 2 it can be seen in Figure 6 
in  the  case  of  the  Powder  A  material  the  initial 
Table 3 Results from 300 mm long steel tubes 
In the case of the 12 mm spigot and Powder A 
material  the  behaviour  of  the  burn  appears  very 
different  to  those  using  Powder  B  although  no 
fibre optic data were collected it can be seen from 
the  high  speed  video  footage  that  the  ignition 
appears to started in the centre of the tube Fig 7. 
When inspecting the spigot surface a clean shiny 
section  can  be  seen  half  way  along  the  length  of 
the  spigot  at  a  distance  of  141  mm  to  195  mm 
from  the  impact  end.  The  burn  appeared  to  be 
moving slowly along the tube before accelerating 
into  a  detonation  both  in  to  the  powder  and  also 
backwards  into  the  semi  burnt  material.  The 
position  of  the  DDT  was  similar  to  the  12  mm 
diameter spigot with Powder B material. 
reaching  5800  m.s-1  at  112  mm  Fig  11  and  the 
sharp colour change at in the spigot at 38 mm Fig 
8.  The greater  surface  area available  for burning 
in the small powder increases the pressure build up 
in the early phase more rapidly than in the larger 
Powder  B  material  case.  The  large  size  of  the 
spigot may be introducing a constriction to the gas 
flow in the powder further increasing the burn rate 
Fig  8.  Image  from  LS03  indicating  the  DDT 
From the burn front measurements with the 15 
mm spigot LS07 using Powder B Table 4 and 
Figure 9 it can be seen that a stable burn velocity 
is not readily established early in the tube length. 
Initially  the  early  probes  showed  a  flash  of 
simultaneous  light  indicating  ignition  near  the 
impact  site  however  light  arrives  at  probes  3-4 
subsequent  to  a  light  reaching  probe.  A  stable 
deflagration appears to have been established from 
probe  5  onwards  at  an  average  velocity  of  1547 
Fig  7.  Images  from  LS01  indicating  the  start  of 
reaction at the centre of the vehicle. 
Using  Powder  A  material  and  increasing  the 
spigot  diameter  from  12  mm  up  to  the  larger  15 
mm  appears  to  have  the  effect  of  shortening  the 
run  distance.  As  indicated  by  the  burn  speed 
Fig 9. Fibre optic output from LS07 15 mm 
Spigot in a 300 mm steel tube. 
Visual  inspection  of  the  spigot  showed  gas 
wash  around  the  edge  of  the  impact  surface 
characteristic  of  an  ignition  but  the  shaft  surface 
had  a  lustre  until  a  distance  of  273  mm  from 
impact end. At this point along the length there is a 
change in the surface condition of the spigot to a 
dull  surface  indicating  a  change  in  the  reaction 
type at this distance. However the reaction at this 
time reached the end of the tube although it shows 
signs  of  possible  DDT.  The  condition  of  the 
spigot the burn velocity and the fragments of the 
tube do not indicate a large reaction. 
Table 4 Results from 300 mm long steel tubes 
This behaviour was repeated with the smaller 
diameter  spigot  the  fibre  optic  output  shows  a 
consistent  burn  at  1780  m.s-1  up  to  a  distance  of 
168 mm and bulging of the tube can be seen from 
184  mm  onwards  along  the  tube  Fig  10.  This 
aligns with the change in the surface condition of 
the spigot at 155 mm from the impact end to the 
dull surface finish and becoming severely pitted at 
173  mm.  The  pitted  surface  coupled  with  the 
damage to the internal surface of the tube Fig 10 
indicates  a  far  more  violent  reaction  detonation 
occured  at  this  point  a  distance  of  173  mm  into 
Fig  10.  Images  from  spigot  and  internal  tube 
surface  in  LS06  indicating  the  DDT  distance  of 
Looking  at  the  burn  velocity  at  different 
lengths down the tubes it can be seen that reducing 
the particle size in the 15mm spigot case caused a 
rapid burn early in the bed the larger surface area 
and choked flow in the powder increasing the burn 
rate. In the case of Powder B and the 15 mm spigot 
LS07  there  is  a  constant  burn  along  the  tube 
with a possible acceleration towards the end as the 
pressure  spikes  due  to  the  burn  front  reaches  the 
end of the tube. Reducing the spigot size to 12 mm 
in  Powder  B  LS06  induced  a  very  rapid  burn 
near  the  end  of  the  tube  distant  from  the  impact 
Burn Velocity on steel tubes
Distance along the tube mm
Fig  11.  Burn  velocities 
Experimental results 300 mm Perspex Tube  
In  the  300  mm  Perspex  tube  vehicle  only 
Powder  B  has  been  tested  at  this  time.  For  both 
spigot sizes a steady burn was initiated very early 
in the tube length see Figure 13 and 14. The flame 
shape is seen to be very un-stable in the high speed 
video footage Fig 12 and the velocity from the 
fibre  optics  is generally  very  unstable  due  to  the 
low spatial resolution of the fibre optic array.  
 Fig  13.  Burn  velocity  in  the  LP01  and  LP02  as 
tracked on the high speed footage. 
For  both  experiments  the  burn  front  shapes 
were unstable and accelerated and decelerated as it 
travelled along the tube. In the 15 mm spigot case 
the velocity jumped to over 5000 m.s-1 at 215 mm 
Fig 1314 LP02 before decelerating as it reached 
the end of the tube this is not considered to be a 
detonation  in  the  material  but  a  feature  of  the 
unstable burn front shape. 
Distance and burn time for Perpex tubes
 Fig  14.  Burn  front  distance  travelled  in  the 
Perspex tubes indicating the change of behaviour 
The  material  burn  velocities  in  the  Perspex 
tubes were seen to be similar to the burn velocity 
noted  in  steel  tube  experiments  LS06  and  LS07 
which both used the larger Powder B. 
When a spigot penetrates an explosive charge 
deconsolidate.  If  the  spigot  intrusion  conditions 
are such that ignition of the charge occurs then the 
reaction will tend to occur initially along the spigot 
as the temperature of the HE around the spigot will 
be  higher  and  the  porosity  will  be  greater.  The 
local  temperature  and  porosity  together  with  the 
volume  of  the  damaged  HE  will  determine  the 
extent to which the reaction grows and hence the 
violence of the reaction.  
The preliminary experiments described in this 
paper were performed to scope the extent to which 
a  reaction  could  grow 
Fig  12.  Image  of  the  unstable  burn  front  in  test 
LP01 from the high speed footage. 
Visual tracking of the burn front with the high 
representation  of  the  burn  speed  Fig  13.  Using 
this  technique  the  average  burn  velocity  was 
Table  5  Results  from  300  mm  long  Perspex 
tubes with 12 and 15 mm spigots. 
measured  at  1460  m.s-1  for  the  12  mm  spigot 
LP01 and 1440 m.s-1 in the 15 mm spigot LP02 in 
the same configuration Table 5.  
Burn Velocity on Perspex tubes
Distance along the tube mm
formulation  pressed  to  a  high  porosity.  For  these 
experiments the density of the HE was chosen to 
be  50  TMD  as  this  is  typically  about  the 
optimum  density  for  deflagration  to  detonation 
transition  to  occur.  These  experiments  may  also 
provide  data  which  can  be  used  to  validate  the 
growth  of  reaction  model  HERMES.  To  validate 
experimental data in which the range of reactions 
are  from  no  reactions  through  to  deflagration  to 
Steel Test Vehicles 
In  the  small  spigot  6.359 mm  cases  it  was 
not  possible  to  generate  a  reaction  of  sufficient 
violence to deform the test vehicle at speeds up to 
106  m.s-1.  The  test  vehicles  however  were  not 
disassembled  so  it  was  not  possible  to  identify 
whether  there  was  any  ignition  or  insufficient 
material was ignited to enable the reaction to grow 
to a significant extent. In these cases there are no 
external signs of reaction on the high speed video 
footage or light output at the fibre optics.  
The  12  mm  and  15  mm  diameter  spigots 
ignited the bed in every case at impact speeds up 
to  105  m.s-1.  In  powder  A  the  12  mm  spigot 
appeared  to  show  signs  of  transitioning  in  the 
centre  of  the  tube  and  burning  in  both  directions 
up  and  down  the  tube.  In  the  15  mm  spigot  case 
the  burn  front  quickly  accelerates  to  5800  m.s-1 
and showed signs of detonation at 38 mm from the 
impact  site.  However  with  the  20  mm  spigot  the 
material  showed  signs  of  detonating  at  127-131 
mm indicating the distance to detonation initially 
decreased  and  then  increased  with  increasing 
There are only two deflagration to detonation 
distances measured for Powder B which prevents 
seeing the same trend in the run distance. In the 20 
mm  spigot  case  the  test  indicated  a  detonation  at 
59- 67 mm and the 12 mm spigot transitioned at 
156-173 mm using the 12 mm spigot the material 
ignited  and  burnt  at  an  average  velocity  of  1780 
m.s-1  before  detonating  at  a  distance  of  156-173 
mm  whilst  in  the  15  mm  case  the  average  burn 
velocity  was  1547  m.s-1.  Indicating  that  at  the 
same  porosity  the  smaller  volume  available  for 
burning  in  the  15  mm  case  reduced  the  pressure 
build  up  inside  the  tube  thus  reducing  the  burn 
The limited results for the experiments in the 
perspex  vehicles  are  as  expected  the  lower 
confinement  provided  by  the  perspex  results  in  a 
low velocity deflagration of a very similar velocity 
in  both  spigot  sizes.  The  burn  velocity  only 
deviated from the 12 mm case after a distance of 
215  mm  where  the  burn  front  for  the  15  mm 
spigot  appeared  to  accelerate  reaching  a  peak  of 
5000  m.s-1.  In  both  cases  this  end  of  the  tube 
distant from the impact was badly damaged due to 
the projectile impact and the confinement offered 
was not consistent with the rest of the tube length.  
Table  6  Summary  of  the  run  distance  and  burn 
Comparing  the  recorded  burn  velocity  in 
Table 6 with that predicted by the modelling there 
appears to be some inconsistencies the modelling 
predicting a burn velocity of 2100 m.s-1 whilst the 
showed  1440  m.s-1. 
experimental  evidence 
However  further  refinements  of  the  mesh  may 
improve this match to the recorded data.  
In analyzing the trend in the results the factors 
determining  the  ignition  and  growth  of  reaction 
must  be  considered.  The  spigot  is  driven  into  the 
HE  by  impact  from  a  projectile  fired  at  around 
105ms  from  a  gas  gun.  As  the  diameter  of  the 
spigot is increased the 
x Amount of damaged HE immediately 
beneath and around the spigot is 
increased. This will promote the ignition 
x Amount of damaged material between the 
sides of the spigot and the wall of the test 
vehicle is decreased. Hence the amount 
of material available for reaction growth 
For  spigots  with  small  diameters  a  small 
volume  of  HE  is  compressed  causing  chemical 
decomposition  however  insufficient  energy  is 
released  to  enable  significant  growth  of  the 
reaction  to  occur.  Increasing  the  spigot  diameter 
increases the volume of the HE that is compressed 
and damaged in an impact although the degree of 
decomposition  may  be  less  due  to  the  impact 
energy  being  deposited  over  a  larger  area.  This 
increase  in  decomposition  volume  decreases  the 
deflagration  to  detonation  distance.  However  as 
the spigot diameter is increased it also reduces the 
amount of HE between the spigot and the wall of 
the  test  vehicle  available  to  burn  and  this  will 
increase the deflagration to detonation distance.  
There will be a critical diameter beyond which 
the  reduction  in  the  amount  of  HE  between  the 
spigot  and  the  wall  of  the  test  vehicle  and  the 
initial volume initiated dominates over the increase 
in  the  volume  of  the  damaged  material.  For 
Formulation A in this configuration and projectile 
velocity  105m.s-1  the  critical  spigot  diameter  is 
between 12 mm and 20 mm more data is required 
for an estimate for Powder B. 
Experiments  have  been  performed  to  understand 
the  growth  of  reaction 
formulation following ignition by spigot intrusion 
in  cylindrical  geometry.  The  porosity  of  the  bed 
was  chosen  to  optimise  the  growth  of  reaction 
processes.  The  results  have  shown 
response is a complex combination of the diameter 
of  the  spigot  and  the  amount  of  HE  between  the 
spigot and the wall of the test vehicle. Analysis of Adjacent Detonating Explosive Slabs
Eric K. Anderson Tariq D. Aslam Scott I. Jackson
Shock and Detonation Physics Group
Weapons Experiments Division
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos New Mexico USA
Abstract. A test series was conducted to investigate explosive assemblies consisting of a
rectangular PBX 9501 slab bonded on one side to a PBX 9502 slab. PBX 9501 layers of
sufcient thickness drove a transverse shock in the PBX 9502 with an eventual transition
to detonation. Here we describe an analytic modeling strategy that couples the Detonation
Shock Dynamics DSD model to compute the PBX 9501 front shape and phase velocity
with shock-polar analysis to model the interaction between the explosive slabs. The effect
of DSD boundary conditions on the results are investigated and we also compare results of
the model to experiments.
Recent tests showed that in explosive assemblies
each consisting of a PBX 9502 slab bonded on one
side to a PBX 9501 slab faster detonation in the
PBX 9501 could transversely initiate detonation in
the PBX 9502 12. A simplied diagram is provided
in Fig. 1 where the shock structure is shown at three
different points in time. The PBX 9501 detonation
drives an oblique shock in the PBX 9502 which
transitions to detonation some distance from the interface between the two explosives. We refer to the
region of the PBX 9502 slab between the interface
of the two explosives and the transition to detonation as initiating layer. In the experimental tests the
pressure associated with the PBX 9501 detonation
was varied by changing the thickness of the PBX
Approved for unlimited release LA-UR-14-24816
Increasing the PBX 9501 slab thickness resulted in reduced initiating layer thickness
and the pressure vs. time-to-detonation relationship
was in good agreement with one-dimensional 1D
shock-to-detonation transition SDT experiments 3.
While previous results suggest that it may be possible to predict initiating layer thickness given a
known shock pressure in the PBX 9501 3 no simple
models exist to predict the steady behavior of both
explosives in the two-layer assemblies. However
similar behavior has been observed by Matignon et
al. 4 in an analogous cylindrical arrangement where
a cylinder of one explosive was surrounded by a
tube of a faster explosive. They modeled the interaction between the two explosives using shock polar
analysis and were able to compute shock angles in
the driven explosive with reasonable accuracy.
In the present work we explore the possibility of
combining DSD with polar analysis to predict the
behavior of the bonded slab assemblies. The pro
693
Table 1. Measured densities and phase velocities
D0 for experimental tests.
Fig. 1. Given sufcient PBX 9501 layer thickness
the steady structure shown at time t  2 and t  3
develops where a PBX 9501 detonation causes the
generation of an initiating layer in the PBX 9502.
A transition to detonation occurs in the PBX 9502
further from the interface.
posed method involves using DSD to predict the
detonation front shape and phase velocity in the
PBX 9501. The DSD-generated front-shape would
then be used to extract a representative shock angle
in the PBX 9501 detonation. The PBX 9501 detonation near the interface between the explosives
would then be modeled as a planar oblique detonation with this representative shock angle. This
simplication would allow the use of polar analysis to predict the shock angle and associated pressure of the PBX 9502 initiating layer shock. Given
this pressure we have shown in previous work that
the PBX 9502 initiating layer thickness 3 can be predicted. We apply this method to three experimental
cases in the present work and compare computed
results with those observed experimentally.
PBX 9501 Front Shape Results and DSD Predictions
For each of the assemblies listed in Table 1 a
streak camera image of the detonation breakout was
combined with a phase velocity measurement to obtain a prole of the detonation front. This process
is described in detail elsewhere 1 but the results for
the assemblies with 1.55 2.00 and 2.5 mm PBX
9501 layers are shown in Figs. 24 by symbols
representing points measured on the streak camera
image. In the gures only the PBX 9501 portion
of the detonation fronts are shown and the interface
with the PBX 9502 is on the left.
Fitting Experimental Front Shape Data
For the dual slab assemblies under consideration
the PBX 9501 slab is subject to different boundary
conditions on each side. This results in an asymmetric front shape requiring modication of the tting
form commonly used for symmetric fronts. For this
reason the following piecewise functional form
based on the established tting form described by
Jackson and Short 5 was used
In this function z represents distance in the direction of detonation propagation and x is the distance
from the center of the slab. The term X represents
the half-thickness of the slab while parameters A1
A2 1 and 2 are allowed to vary to achieve a t.
Parameters B1 and B2 allow for the function maximum to shift away from x  0 C1 and C2 allow
for a shift in the vertical z direction and S is the
x coordinate where the piecewise function splits to
accommodate the different boundary conditions on
each side of the PBX 9501 slab.
The constraints imposed on the tting algorithm
are to require continuity at x  S in the function as
well as its rst and second derivatives. In addition
S is required to be the maximum of both sides of the
piecewise function which is imposed by requiring
B1  B2  S. Subject to these constraints the
BoosterDirection of PropagationDetonating PBX 9502DetonatingPBX 9501Initiating    Layert  3t  2t  1PBX     9502Fig. 2. Front curvature data and ts for the case of the 1.55 mm PBX 9501 layer. The edge angles of Table 2
are shown graphically.
Fig. 3. Front curvature data and ts for the case of the 2.00 mm PBX 9501 layer.
parameters are determined by minimizing the sum
of the squares of the t residuals.
The resulting ts are shown for each experiment
by the solid line in Figs. 2-4. The quality of each
t is characterized in Table 2 as the norm of the difference between each experimental data point and
the function value corresponding to that x-location
on the detonation front. In addition Table 2 shows
cid310.50.00.5cid310.20cid310.15cid310.10cid310.050.00xmmzmmExperimentalDataCalibratedBoundaryConditionsExperimentalBoundaryConditionsFittoExperimentalDataedge angle leftedge angle rightcid311.0cid310.50.00.51.0cid310.35cid310.30cid310.25cid310.20cid310.15cid310.10cid310.050.00xmmzmmFittoExperimentalDataCalibratedBoundaryConditionsExperimentalBoundaryConditionsExperimentalDataFig. 4. Front curvature data and ts for the case of the 2.5 mm PBX 9501 layer.
the edge angles at each side of the PBX 9501 slab
which are used to generate front shapes with DSD.
Angles on the right edge correspond to the unconned PBX 9501 surface while angles on the left
correspond to the PBX 9502 interface.
imperfections in the bond between the two slabs led
to high curvature near the slab interface. Also it
should be noted that the HMX crystals in PBX 9501
may be well in excess of 100 m which could possibly result in front-shape anomalies.
Table 2. Error associated with front curvature tting
expressed as the norm of the t residuals and edge
angles computed from detonation-front tting.
The results of Figs. 2-4 and Table 2 show that
larger edge angles were observed on the PBX 9502
interface than on the side of the PBX 9501 slab exposed to the atmosphere. This is unexpected given
that PBX 9502 should provide at least as much connement to the PBX 9501 as air. It is possible that
DSD Assuming Unconned Boundary Conditions
DSD theory states that for a given explosive
there exists a relationship between the local curvature of the detonation front  and the normal velocity Dn. Given this relationship it is possible to
compute the steady-state shape of a detonation front
in a rectangular slab of explosive. To apply DSD
to the PBX 9501 slabs in our two-layer assemblies
the analysis can be simplied by assuming the PBX
9501 is unconned on both sides. This assumption
ignores the fact that one side of the PBX 9501 slab
is bonded to PBX 9502 which provides a low but
possibly non-negligible level of connement.
With this simplication the application of DSD
to the slab geometry is fairly routine. An established
Dn- relationship for PBX 9501 is
1  c2 pBqe2  c3 pBqe3
1  c4 pBqe4  c5 pBqe5
cid311.0cid310.50.00.51.0cid310.20cid310.15cid310.10cid310.050.00xmmzmmExperimentalDataCalibratedBoundaryConditionsExperimentalBoundaryConditionsFittoExperimentalDataTable 3. PBX 9501 DSD parameters 6.
where e2  e4  1 and e3  e5  2 Dn is the
local shock normal velocity and  the local shock
curvature 6. The DSD parameters are given in Table 3. The value of DCJ used in Eq. 1 was computed for the experimentally measured densities using the equations
DCJ  DCJnomp1  c6p00nom  1qq and 2
where 0 is the measured density of the unreacted
PBX 9501 slab. The value of B was also adjusted
for density using the equation
B  BP BX9501p00nomqc7.
The value of max was increased to 5 mm1 to extrapolate to the thinnest PBX 9501 sample. The parameter s is the complement to the shock deection angle and the value was chosen assuming both
faces of the PBX 9501 slab were exposed to atmospheric air. We can dene the slope s  dzdx
and for a steady solution 7
for the slab geometry. Substituting Eqs. 1 and 6
into 5 results in an ODE that can be solved for
spxq given an assumed value for D0 and appropriate boundary conditions. The slope spxq can then
be integrated resulting in the DSD predicted front
The boundary conditions chosen for this analysis
are to require the slope at the right edge of the slab
spz  zr edgeq   tanp2  sq 
and at the left edge
spz  zr edgeq  tanp2  sq .
Iteration is then used to nd the value of D0 that
satises these boundary conditions at both edges of
the PBX 9501 slabs in each experiment. Results of
this analysis are displayed as the dashed curve in
DSD Assuming Experimental Edge Angles
One method to allow the DSD-generated front
shapes to reect the asymmetry caused by the PBX
9502 slab adjacent to the PBX 9501 is to use the
edge angles determined by tting as listed in Table
2. The boundary conditions used to solve Eq. 5
spz  zr edgeq   tanprightq
at the right edge and at the left edge
spz  zr edgeq  tanplef tq .
In these equations right is the unconned right
edge angle from Table 2 and lef t is the edge angle
on the PBX 9502 side. With these new boundary
5 can be solved as described in
the previous section. The resulting front shapes are
plotted in Figs. 24 using dotted lines.
Summary of Front-Shape DSD Predictions
The aforementioned DSD analysis can be used
to predict PBX 9501 detonation front shapes and
phase velocities in two-layer PBX 95019502 assemblies. For each of the experimental tests conducted the phase velocities predicted by DSD using
both calibrated unconned edge angles and experimentally determined edge angles are listed in Table
4. In Figs. 2 and 3 it can be seen that the use of
DSD with experimental boundary conditions results
in better agreement with experiments than the use of
boundary conditions calibrated for unconned PBX
9501. In Fig. 4 DSD with calibrated boundary conditions appears to produce better agreement with the
experimental front shape on the left PBX 9502 interface side while producing worse agreement on
the right unconned side. It is possible that for this
experiment the lack of data at the center resulted in
less accurate edge angle results.
The results of Table 4 demonstrate that the phase
velocity computed using DSD is fairly insensitive
to the edge angle used to determine boundary conditions. The largest discrepancy between the two
DSD computations is 18 ms for the case of the
2.5 mm PBX 9501. Except for this case experimentally measured phase velocities are 20-30 ms
higher than DSD predictions. The use of the experimental edge angle improves the agreement with
experiment slightly for the 1.55 mm and 2.00 mm
cases and substantially for the 2.5 mm case.
Table 4. Phase velocities measured experimentally
computed using calibrated unconned DSD edge
angles and computed using experimentally measured edge angles.
D0 DSD - D0 DSD Exp. Edge
Application of Shock Polar Analysis
Shock polar analysis may be applied to the simplied model of the PBX 95019502 interaction rep
698
Fig. 5. Regions under consideration and shock or
detonation structures separating them indicated by
dashed lines. Dark gray indicates PBX 9502 while
white coloring indicates PBX 9501. Light gray
shading indicates the release fan. Regions 1 and 2
are under pressure equilibrium and Regions 4 and
5 are also under pressure equilibrium at a different
pressure Region 3 only exists in the PBX 9501.
resented graphically in Fig. 5. In this model the
curved detonation front in the PBX 9501 slab is
replaced with an oblique-planar detonation with a
shock angle chosen to represent either DSD front
shapes or experimental data. Behind the PBX 9501
detonation pressure in the detonation products is
assumed to decrease isentropically in a release fan
these products are assumed to behave as a constant ideal-gas. As seen in the gure a PBX 9502 initiating layer shock is assumed to extend from the
intersection of the PBX 9501 detonation with the
interface between the two explosives. This shock
structure divides the modeled explosive into ve regions
 Region 1 Unreacted PBX 9502 ahead of the
 Region 2 Unreacted PBX 9501 ahead of the
PBX 9501 detonation. Regions 1 and 2 are in pressure equilibrium.
 Region 3 High pressure PBX 9501 product between the PBX 9501 detonation and release fan.
 Region 4 Shocked PBX 9502 in pressure equilibrium with Region 5.
 Region 5 PBX 9501 detonation product in pressure equilibrium with Region 4.
Direction of HE Flow Shock FixedOblique ShockInitiating Layer ShockPBX 9502PBX 9501Region 1PBX 9502Release FanRegion 3Region 4shockedPBX 9502Region 5shockedPBX 9501Region 2PBX 9501Pressure differentials between Regions 1 and 4
and Regions 2 3 and 5 are maintained by shock
structures which may be analyzed separately
oblique detonation in the PBX 9501 the obliqueinert shock in the PBX 9502 and the release isentrope in the PBX 9501. An overview of the analysis
strategy is presented below followed by a detailed
description of the analysis of each of these features.
To use this technique in a predictive fashion a
PBX 9501 shock angle would be chosen based on
DSD front shape calculations. The phase velocity
would also be determined by DSD. Then a pseudoChapman-Jouguet CJ analysis would be used to
compute the conditions in Region 3. A release isentrope could then be calculated which reduces the
pressure from Region 3 to Region 5. For the DSDdetermined phase velocity a shock polar can be
computed for the PBX 9502 oblique shock as well.
Because pressure and streamline angle  must be
constant across Regions 4 and 5 the PBX 9501 release isentrope and PBX 9502 shock polar are presented in P - space in Fig. 6. The solution that
satises this requirement occurs at the intersection
of the PBX 9501 release isentrope dashed curve
with the PBX 9502 shock polar solid curve. The
pressure at this solution is marked with a horizontal line for emphasis. This pressure could be combined with a Pop-plot to predict the initiating layer
thickness. The analysis for the oblique shocks and
release isentrope are described in detail below.
PBX 9502 Initiating-Layer Shock-Analysis
The initiating-layer shock in the PBX 9502 was
assumed to be a planar oblique-shock. The oblique
shock analysis was conducted by rst considering a
planar normal shock whose behavior is described
by the Euler equations
pi  iD2  p  pUp  Dq2  and
where  and i are the downstream and upstream
densities Up is the downstream particle velocity
Fig. 6. Diagram showing PBX 9502 shock polar
solid curve Region 4 and 5 pressure horizontal
line and PBX 9501 release isentrope dashed.
in the laboratory frame D is the shock velocity p
and pi are the downstream and upstream pressures
and e and ei are the downstream and upstream specic internal energies. Equations 11-13 can be
simplied by assuming pi is small relative to other
Equations 11-13 when combined with an
EOS can be solved to determine post-shock pressure given a value for shock velocity D. For this
analysis the Mie-Grneisen Keane EOS was used
and is described in detail by Aslam et. al 8. The
Mie-Grneisen Keane parameters used for results
reported here are 0  1.890 gcm3 K0  6.5 GPa
0  23 K18  4 0  0.5 and q  1.
The normal shock analysis can be extended to
oblique planar shocks by replacing the shock velocity D with the oblique-shock normal velocity Dn.
Dn is related to the shock deection angle  and
phase velocity D0 by the equation Dn  D0 cos .
To generate a shock polar such as the one in Fig. 6
we simply vary the shock angle  from 00 to 900
and plot the resulting pressures and corresponding
Table 5 lists experimentally measured initiating
layer shock angles  for each assembly tested.
The streamline angles and Region 5 pressures were
computed with Eqs. 11-13 and the PBX 9502
EOS. The pressures are also reported in column ve
of Table 6 for comparison to the model results.
0510150102030405060PGPaTable 5. Experimentally measured initiating-layer
shock-angle  and corresponding streamline angle
 and pressure computed by applying shock-polar
analysis to the PBX 9502 slabs.
PBX 9501 Oblique Detonation Analysis
To analyze the PBX 9501 detonation we make
the assumption here that the curved detonation can
be modeled as a planar-oblique detonation. This
assumption greatly simplies the analysis but the
trade-off is that the curvature of the detonation and
its effects on the ow are neglected and accuracy
can suffer as a result. A more accurate treatment
would be to use a reactive ow model but the purpose of the present work is to determine the value
of a simple analytic model.
With this assumption analysis of the PBX 9501
white region of Fig. 5 was a two step process.
The rst step was to analyze the oblique detonation following the analysis of a CJ detonation described in Fickett and Davis 9. Adjustment is made
for the angle of the shock by equating DCJ to the
shock normal velocity DCJ  Dn  D0 cos 
where D0 and  are the phase velocity and shock
angle from DSD analysis. With this value of DCJ
the mass-specic heat release from detonation qCJ
can then be calculated with the equation from Fickett and Davis
A  value of 2.85 was assumed for this analysis.
With qCJ calculated from Eq. 14 pressure at the
start of the release isentrope can be calculated using
where 0 is the density of the PBX 9501 upstream
of the oblique shock. Similarly
where c is the sound speed.
Analysis of PBX 9501 Release Isentrope
The release isentrope follows the PBX 9501 detonation and reduces the pressure in Region 3 to that
of Region 5. With  p  c and e specied at the
head of the release isentrope the conditions at any
downstream density d within the isentrope can be
calculated using the equations
where the subscript d indicates a downstream value.
We also track the radial velocity within the isentrope Ur polar angle relative to a polar-coordinate
system xed at the head of the expansion fan  and
streamline angle  using the equations developed
by Bdzil and Stewart 10
Using the aforementioned PBX 9501 oblique detonation analysis and Eqs. 1924 to describe the
release isentrope a release isentrope can be plotted
in pressure vs. streamline angle space as shown in
Results and Discussion
Table 6 summarizes the results of experimental
tests and model predictions for three PBX
95019502 assemblies with varying PBX 9501 layer
In the second column the PBX 9501
oblique shock angles required to generate the PBX
9502 initiating layer pressure associated with the
observed initiating layer shock angles are listed for
each experimental test experimental phase velocities from Table 4 and the Mie-Grneisen Keane
EOS and PBX 9502 parameters described previously were also used to calculate PBX 9502 pressures. These pressures are listed in the fth column.
Columns three and four list
oblique shock angles computed by averaging the
DSD front-shapes over the half of the slab closest
to the PBX 9502 interface. Column three angles
were generated assuming experimentally observed
edge angles at the PBX 9502 interface while column four angles were generated assuming the PBX
9501 edge angle calibrated from unconned tests.
The pressures listed in columns six and seven of
Table 6 are those predicted by the model for the
PBX 9501 oblique shock angles of columns three
and four. For the case of the 1.55 mm thick PBX
9501 the model prediction using asymmetric DSD
boundary conditions is about 2.7 GPa low while the
prediction using symmetric DSD boundary conditions is lower by another 0.7 GPa.
The pressures predicted for the cases of the 2.00
and 2.5 mm thick PBX 9501 are signicantly lower
than the experimental values for both the asym
metric DSD boundary conditions and symmetric
boundary conditions.
The pressures predicted with the present model
are highly dependent on the angle assumed for the
PBX 9501 detonation. Increasing the angle of the
oblique detonation shifts the head of the release
isentrope to lower pressure and higher streamline
turning angle. As the PBX 9501 detonation angle is
increased the match point between the PBX 9502
polar and PBX 9501 release isentrope increases and
then decreases in pressure. For example for the
case of the 1.55 mm PBX 9501 the highest match
pressure predicted by the model is 19.6 GPa at a
PBX 9501 detonation angle of 250. Similarly for
the other two cases the highest match pressure is
between 19.5 and 20 GPa and an angle of approximately 250.
Summary and Conclusions
A method combining DSD front shape and phase
velocity calculations with polar matching was used
to analyze the interaction between adjacent detonating PBX 9501 and PBX 9502 slabs. In the analysis the shock angles from DSD are used with the
DSD-predicted phase velocity to compute the shock
polars for each slab and determine the pressure associated with the PBX 9502 initiating layer shock.
This method makes a number of assumptions and
one of the sources of error arises from the extraction of an oblique shock angle from the curved PBX
9501 DSD front shape for use in polar analysis. The
technique chosen here was to average the shock angle over the half of the PBX 9501 slab closest to the
Table 6. Results of initiating layer pressure predictions and the PBX 9502 oblique shock angles used to
Detonation pp. 11821190 Ofce of Naval
5. S. I. Jackson and M. Short Determination
of the velocity-curvature relationship for unknown front shapes AIP Conference Proceedings 14261 pp. 347350 2012.
6. T. Aslam and M. Short Detonation shock dynamics overview and calibration Tech. Rep.
LA-UR-13-26358 Los Alamos National Laboratory 2013.
7. T. Aslam Detonation shock dynamics calibration of PBX 9501 AIP Conference Proceedings 9551 p. 813 2007.
8. T. D. Aslam R. Gustavsen N. Sanchez
and B. D. Bartram An equation of state
for polymethylpentene TPX including multishock response AIP Conference Proceedings 14261 pp. 767770 2012.
9. W. Fickett and W. Davis Detonation Theory
and Experiment Dover New York 2000.
10. J. Bdzil and D. Stewart Theory of detonation shock dynamics Shock Wave Science and
Technology Reference Library 6 pp. 373453
PBX 9502 interface rather than use the PBX 9501
shock edge angle at the PBX 9502 interface. This
resulted in initiating layer shock pressures lower
than those indicated by experimentally measured
initiating layer shock angles. The best agreement
appears to be obtained using PBX 9501 shock angles near 250 suggesting that initiating layer behavior is dependent on the detonation behavior of a signicant portion of the PBX 9501 slab rather than
just the portion closest to the PBX 9502 interface. It
is likely that incorporating full reactive ow simulations can yield suitable results but at much higher
computational expense.
This effort was funded by the U.S. Department
of Energy Campaign 2 Dynamic Material Properties.
Safety of high explosives under low velocity impact experiment ignition criterion 
and numerical prediction 
Pengwan. Chen1 Danzhu Ma1 Yong Tian2 Ji ngming Li2 Kaida Dai1 and Qiang Zhou1 
1State Key Laboratory of Explosion Science and Technology 
Beijing Institute of Technology Beijing China 
2Institute of Chemical Materials of China Academy of Engineering Physics 
Abstract. In this paper experiment and numerical simulation were conducted to evaluate 
the safety of high explosive under low velocity impact. Specimen size effects on impactinduced reaction of high explosives have been experimentally studied in Steven test. In 
order  to  investigate  the  specimen  size  effect  under  different  impact  tests  the  effective 
volume of explosive charge and the critical specific mechanical energy were introduced to 
analyze the impact sensitivity of several PBXs. The results show that with the increase of 
effective  volume  the  critical  specific  mechanical  energy  needed  for  explosive  ignition 
decreases  and  tends  to  reach  a  constant  value.  A  new  ignition  criterion  in  terms  of 
effective plastic work and specific plastic power was proposed to predict the ignition of 
explosives under low velocity impact. To evaluate the validity of this ignition criterion 
the ignition threshold velocities of PBXs under Steven test was predicted as well as the 
modified drop weight test Susan test and Spigot test. The predicted results show a good 
agreement with experimental results. 
handling  manufacture 
Low velocity impact may ignite the solid high 
incidents. The safety of high explosives under low 
velocity impact is one of the most important issues 
transportation procedures. Various evaluation tests 
have  been  developed  for  low  velocity  impact 
scenarios  including  but  not  limited  to  the  drop 
hammer test the Susan test the Steven test and the 
Spigot test with a charge mass varying from tens 
of milligrams to several kilograms. The effects of 
specimen size on explosive sensitivity were found 
in some impact tests such as drop hammer impact 
test and Steven tests1 in which specimen size was 
The  violent reaction  induced  by  low velocity 
impact  is  not  a  direct  result  of  impact  due  to  the 
low amplitude and long duration of pressure. The 
response  of  solid  explosives  under  low  velocity 
impact  includes  several  complex  processes  such 
as the localization of plastic work the conversion 
from plastic work to heat the heat conduction the 
transition.  To  accurately  describe  the  complex 
consists of a high explosive charge confined by a 
PTFE ring or a radial gap between explosive and 
holder a thick steel cover plate on the impact face 
and a steel holder. The reaction threshold velocity 
was used to evaluate the sensitivity of explosive in 
The  setup  of  Susan  test9 is  shown  in  figure 
1c.  The  projectile  used  in  Susan  test  carries  an 
explosive  charge  about  50 mm100  mm  and  its 
total  weight  is  about  5.44  kg.  The  projectile  is 
designed to simulate the situation of collapse in a 
manner of squeeze and nip on explosive between 
metal  surfaces  in  the  process.  The  projectile  is 
accelerated by an air-gun or propellant-gun to hit a 
massive  steel  target  with  a  certain  velocity.  The 
flying  velocity  of  the  projectile  is  measured  by  a 
timekeeping  system  to  evaluate  the  sensitivity  of 
the explosive charge.  
The Spigot test originally developed by Gibbs 
and Popolato at  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory 
in  198010  was  used  to  simulate  the  effects  of  a 
large charge in a weapon being impaled by some 
type  of  blunt-ended  rod.  The  test  structure  as 
shown in figure 1d involves an explosive charge 
which  is  machined  as  a  larger  cylinder.  The 
explosive  charge  is  glued  into  the  counterbore  of 
an  inert  plastic  bonded  material  which  has  the 
same  shock  impedance  characteristics  as 
explosive. The open end of the explosive charge is 
covered with a steel plate which has a hole at its 
center. A steel pin with a flat head and a long pole 
is  fitted  through  this  hole  so  that  the  shaft 
protrudes  from  the  bottom  of  the  explosive.  The 
tested structure is dropped from a certain height or 
accelerated  to  a  certain  velocity  by  a  piston 
accelerator.  The  steel  pin  impacts  onto  the  steel 
target on the ground. The threshold drop height or 
the threshold drop velocity is used to evaluate the 
sensitivity of explosive. . 
For details of the experiments please refer to 
our previous work11. 
processes  is  very  difficult  and  the  mechanisms 
concerning  impact-induced  reaction  still  remain 
controversial.  In  order  to  evaluate  the  safety  of 
explosive  under  low  velocity  impact  several 
ignition  criteria  based  on 
pressure  and  plastic  shear  strain  rate  have  been 
proposed  such  as  the  power  law  criterion  by 
Browning2 and  Scammon3  the  modified  power 
law criterion by Gruau et al4. the criterion based 
 by  Partom5 and  the  ignition  model  using 
stress tensor by Reaugh6. 
In this paper specimen size effects on impactinduced  reaction  of  high  explosives  have  been 
experimentally studied in the Steven test. In order 
to investigate the specimen size effect on impactinduced  reaction  thresholds  of  explosives  under 
different  impact  tests  the  effective  volume  of 
explosive  charge  and 
mechanical energy were introduced to analyze the 
impact  sensitivity  of  several  PBXs.  Based  on  the 
mechanism of ignition a new ignition criterion in 
terms of effective plastic work and specific plastic 
power  was  proposed  to  predict  the  ignition  of 
explosives under low velocity impact. 
Impact tests of explosive sensitivity 
The modified drop weight test setup7 consists 
of a drop hammer an embedded explosive pill a 
Teflon  confinement  ring  an  impact  anvil  and  a 
steel target plate. The drop hammer is hung from a 
certain  height  and  then  is  released  to  impact  the 
steel  target  plate  on  the  ground  vertically  as 
shown in figure 1a. The Teflon ring was used to 
keep the explosive material from flowing into the 
gap  at  the  joints.  The  reaction  threshold  drop 
height  was  used  to  evaluate  the  sensitivity  of 
The Steven test introduced by Chidester and 
co-workers 8   has  been  firstly  performed  at 
Lawrence  Livermore  National  Laboratory  as  well 
as  a  modified  version  at  Los  Alamos  National 
Laboratory.  Figure  1b  shows  the  basic  Steven 
test  geometry1  and  the  schematic  diagram  of 
different projectiles. The test involves a target with 
high  explosive  charge  which  is  impacted  at 
increasingly  higher  velocities  with  a 
projectile  until  a  reaction  occurs.  The  target 
Fig.  1.  Schematic  diagrams  of  four  different  low 
velocity impact tests. 
Specimen size effects 
In the tests mentioned above a fixed specimen 
size  is  usually  used.  In  fact  the  size  of  charge 
plays  an  important  role  in  impact  sensitivity  of 
solid  high  explosive.  It  has  been  experimentally 
verified  that  double-thickness  PBX  has  a  higher 
threshold for reaction12 13. 
In this study the Steven tests of PBX-1 87 
HMX  7  TATB  and  6  Fluororubber  and 
Composition B with various charge size have been 
conducted and a size effect on impact sensitivity 
has been noted. As shown in Table. 1 the effect of 
obvious while the effect of specimen diameter is 
negligible  in  the  range  of  consideration.  In  the 
range  of  tested  diameter  the  threshold  impact 
velocity increases with the specimen thickness for 
PBX-1 but decreases with the specimen thickness 
for Composition B.  
impact  sensitivity 
Under  low  velocity  impact  the  ignition  of 
explosive  happens  when 
amplitude of the pressure and plastic strain rate are 
sufficient  enough.  For  a  thinner  PBX-1  the 
interaction between the incident shock waves and 
the shock waves reflected from the steel back plate 
generates  a  higher  pressure  at  the  center  near  the 
rear surface of explosives and it tends to generate 
a large plastic deformation more easily. But for a 
thicker one the pressure and plastic strain are well 
distributed along the thickness of explosive charge 
i.e. the axial direction of impact loading and the 
ignition  needs  a  stronger  insult.  In  the  case  of 
Composition B contains 40 TNT which has a 
relatively  low  melting  point  of  80.9  .  It  might 
melt under friction or shear caused by low-velocity 
impact  and  allows  the  flowing  of  explosive 
material. TNT melting is endothermic. In addition 
the  flow  due  to  TNT  melting  may  repair  defects 
and  damages  induced  by  the  impact  so  both 
processes  may  hinder  the  spread  of  burning.  For 
the  thinner  Composition  B  the  melting  process 
occurs  more  easily  due  to  the  localization  of 
pressure and plastic strain. Therefore the threshold 
velocity  of  the  thinner  specimen  is  much  higher 
than that of the thicker one. 
Table.  1.  Reaction  threshold  velocities  for  two 
explosives  with  different  size  designs  in  Steven 
the  measured  overpressure 
Interestingly  there  is  also  a  significant  size 
effect on the reaction violence. The relative energy 
release  is  used  to  quantitatively  evaluate  the 
relative reaction violence which is defined as the 
overpressure  calculated  in  the  condition  of  ideal 
detonation.  Similarly 
increases with the thickness but decreases with the 
diameter of high explosive charges. Fig. 2 and Fig. 
3 show a typical relationship between the relative 
energy release and impact velocity for PBX-1 and 
Composition  B  where  a  limit  for  each  given 
specimen size as the impact velocity increasing is 
thickness  the  one  with  a  larger  diameter  gets 
lower reaction violence than another one.  
the  specimens  with 
the  cracks  within 
In  the  Steven  test  the  explosive  charge  is 
subject  to  an  axial  compressive  loading  being 
horizontally  impacted  by  the  projectile.  As  the 
mechanical work and power of the insult increases 
the  localized  ignition  occurs.  The  reaction  grows 
explosive along the trajectory of the projectile and 
the  pressure  rises  at  an  accelerated  rate.  The 
increase in the thickness of the explosive charge is 
beneficial  to  such  a  process  and  results  in  the 
occurrence of more violent reaction. So the larger 
the  thickness  is  the  more  violent  the  reaction  is. 
But the increase in diameter of explosive charge is 
not  beneficial  to  reaction  propagation.  The  radial 
volume  away  from  the  impact  location  may 
rupture due to expansion and projectile punching 
which  hinders  the  further  development  of  the 
Fig. 2. A typical relationship between the relative 
energy release and impact velocity for PBX-1  
Fig. 3. A typical relationship between the relative 
The  effective  volume  and  the  critical  specific 
In  order  to  investigate  the  size  effect  on  the 
explosive  reaction  thresholds  under  low  velocity 
impact  the  effective  volume  and  the  critical 
specific  mechanical  energy  are  introduced.  The 
effective volume is the actual volume in explosive 
that experiences the insults during impact loading. 
For the modified drop weight test and Susan test 
the impact loading is acted on the whole volume of 
explosive specimen for the Steven test and Spigot 
test  the  impact  loading  is  acted  on  a  localized 
volume due to the big size difference between the 
specimen  and  projectile.  In  these  low  velocity 
in  general  mechanical  energy 
  Modified drop weight impact test
           by our group 2012
  Steven test by our group 2012
  Steven test by Xiaogan Dai 2009
  Spigot test by our group 2011
  Susan test by Qingyun Ruan 1989
80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220
The effective volume cm3
Fig.  4  The  relationship  between  the  effective 
volume and the critical specific mechanical energy. 
The ignition criterion 
the  plastic  deformation 
essential  factor  for  the  explosive  ignition  under 
low  velocity  impact.  The  plastic  work  due  to  the 
high-strain-rate  deformation  is  transformed  into 
heat  with  the  attendant  temperature  rise  which 
causes  the  formation  of  hot  spot  in  explosive. 
However  not  all  the  plastic  work  is  deposited  as 
heat  only  the  effective  part  is.  When  the  plastic 
strain  rate  is  low  the  plastic  work  cant  be 
deposited  due  to  the  dissipation  caused  by  heat 
conduction  and  the  plastic  deformation  can  be 
treated  as  an  isothermal  process.  Only  when  the 
plastic strain rate is high enough the plastic work 
is  deposited  in  the  form  of  heat  energy  and  the 
deposited  plastic  work  is  seen  as  the  effective 
work. The plastic strain rate is consistent with the 
specific plastic power which represents the rate of 
energy deposition. The effective plastic work must 
be  large  enough  reaching  a  threshold  value  and 
then the explosive can be ignited as shown in Fig. 
converts into heat in explosives due to deformation 
when  the  kinetic  energy  of  projectile  acts  on  the 
explosive charge causing temperature rise or even 
chemical  reaction  of  explosives.  The  mechanical 
energy  acted  on  unit  effective  volume  under 
lowest  impact  velocity  or  lowest  drop  height 
specific mechanical energy. 
In  this  paper  the  plastic  zones  for  different 
explosive charges in the Steven test and Spigot test 
were  used  to  calculate  the  effective  volume.  The 
plastic  zone  was  determined  by  numerical 
simulation. The mechanical energy is derived from 
kinetic energy of projectile or the potential energy 
of  drop height  in different  tests.  Then  the critical 
specific  mechanical  energy  can  be  calculated 
the  mechanical  energy  by 
Fig.  4  shows  the  relationships  between  the 
effective  volume  and 
mechanical  energy  for  PBX-1.  It  shows  that  the 
critical  specific  mechanical  energy  significantly 
decreases  with  the  increase  of  effective  volume 
and tends to be a constant value when the effective 
volume  is  large  enough.  The  same  trend  was 
observed  for  PBX  9501  PBX  9404  LX-04  and 
LX-1414.The constant may indicate the sensitivity 
level of explosive under low velocity impact. 
The specimen size effect is associated with the 
thermal  prosperities  of  the  explosive.  Part  of  the 
temperature rise and even ignition of the localized 
volume of explosive. During this process the heat 
conduction can not be ignored. Comparing with a 
larger volume of explosive the heat dissipation in 
a small one is faster. So more stimulus energy in 
other words a higher specific mechanical energy 
is needed for an ignition. 
Fig. 5 Principle of the ignition crtierion 
the  plastic  work  deposited  under 
mechanical  stimulation  is  related  to  a  critical 
definite explosion based on which a dual criterion 
of  ignition  is  suggested11.  The  dual  criterion  of 
ignition incorporates the stress history the plastic 
strain rate and the duration time 
where  m is  the  von-Mises  stress 
effective plastic strain rate  1t is the time when the 
plastic  work  begins  to  be  deposited  in  local 
explosive  2t is the time when ignition occurs 
is  the  specific  plastic  power  and 
specific  plastic  energy  an  integral  from  specific 
power curve shown as the shadow areas in Fig.3. 
0W  are  the  threshold  parameters  of  the 
ignition criterion. Criterion 1 indicates a critical 
value  of  the  plastic  power  beyond  which  the 
plastic  work  begins  to  be  deposited  in  a  local 
region resulting in localized heating. And criterion 
2  indicates  a  critical  value  of  deposited  plastic 
work beyond which the explosive will be ignited. 
In  other  words  the  hot  spot  will  be  generated 
when  the  plastic  power  is  high  enough  then  the 
explosive  will  be  ignited  by  the  heat  which  is 
transformed  from  the  deposited  plastic  work.  We 
calibrate  the  ignition  criterion  by  associating  the 
criterion to a definite state of impact tests reaction 
or  no-reaction  and  determine 
0W   through  numerical 
simulation  of  the  impact  test  at  experimental 
threshold velocity. The threshold values of  0P  and 
0W  can  be  used  to  predict  the  ignition  although 
the complex ignition processes including the heat 
conduction and the formation of hot spot are not 
considered in the dual criterion. 
The  parameters  of  ignition  criterion  were 
impact velocity of Steven tests of PBX-1 with four 
different size designs the details can be found in 
our previous work11. To verify the validity of the 
criterion  the  ignition  parameters  are  used  to 
predict the ignition threshold velocities of PBX-1 
under  Steven  test  with  different  size  designs  and 
different  shape  projectiles  the  modified  drop 
weight test with different size designs Susan test 
and  Spigot  test  by  numerical  simulations.  The 
relationships  between  impact  velocity  and  the 
specific  plastic  energy  were  determined.  The 
stW  are  calculated  with  a  series  of 
impacts  at  increasing  impact  velocities  and  the 
stW  vs  impact  velocity  curve  is  shown  in  Fig.  6. 
The  predicted  threshold  velocity  can  be  obtained 
using the parameter 
0W  in criterion 2. 
stW  versus impact velocity curve 
of PBX-1 samples in Steven test 
the  comparison  between 
experimental and predicted threshold velocities of 
PBX-1  in  Steven  test  Susan  test  and  Spigot  test 
utilizing  the  ignition  criterion.  The  predicted 
results show a good agreement with experimental 
resultsand  the  errors  of  prediction  are  less  than 
15.  The  ignition  criterion  has  proven  to  be 
effective in predicting the ignition of PBX-1 under 
different impact tests. 
Specimen  size  effects  on 
reaction  of  two  high  explosives  PBX-1  and 
Composition B have been experimentally studied 
in  Steven  test  and  Modified  drop  weight  impact 
test.  The  effect  of  specimen  thickness  on  impact 
sensitivity is obvious while the effect of specimen 
diameter is negligible in the range of consideration. 
In  the  range  of  tested  diameter  the  threshold 
thickness  for  PBX-1  but  decreases  with  the 
specimen  thickness  for  Composition  B  under 
Steven  test.  The  reaction  violence  increases  with 
the  thickness  but  decreases  with  the  diameter  of 
high explosive charges.  
In order to investigate the specimen size effect 
explosives  under  different 
specific  mechanical 
effective  volume  of  explosive  charge  and  the 
introduced  to  analyze  the  impact  sensitivity  of 
several  PBXs.  The  results  show  that  with  the 
increase  of  effective  volume  the  critical  specific 
mechanical  energy  needed  for  explosive  ignition 
decreases and tends to reach a constant value. 
A new ignition criterion in terms of effective 
plastic  work  and  specific  plastic  power  was 
proposed  to  predict  the  ignition  of  explosives 
under  low  velocity  impact.  The  parameters  of 
ignition  criterion  were  determined  using 
experimental  threshold  impact  velocity  of  Steven 
tests  of  PBX-1  with  four  different  size  designs 
and then the ignition parameters are used to predict 
the  ignition  threshold  velocities  of  PBX-1  under 
test  with  different  size  designs  and 
different  shape  projectiles  the  modified  drop 
weight test with different size designs Susan test 
and  Spigot  test  by  numerical  simulations.  The 
predicted  results  show  a  good  agreement  with 
experimental results. 
Fig.  7.    Comparison  between  experimental  and  predicted  threshold  velocities  of  PBX-1  in  Steven  test 
Susan test and Spigot test utilizing the ignition criterion. Validation of a Pressure Dependent PBX 9502 Cookoff Model 
Aviles-Ramos C. Hobbs M. L. Parker G. R. Kaneshige M. J. Holmes M. D. 
Advanced Engineering Analysis and Explosive Applications and Special Projects Los Alamos National 
Laboratory Los Alamos New Mexico 87545 
Engineering Sciences Center and Energetic Components Realization Sandia National Laboratories 
Albuquerque New Mexico 87105 
Abstract. Cookoff of the plastic bonded explosive PBX9502 has strong pressure effects 
during  exposure  to  abnormal  thermal  environments.  A  decomposition  model  for  PBX 
9502  has  recently  been  developed1  to  include  the  effects  of  pressure  density  and 
confinement. The purpose of the current work is to evaluate the predictive ability of this 
thermal  decomposition  model  using  Latin  Hypercube  Sampling  LHS  techniques.  The 
LHS  predictions  will  be  compared  to  Lawrence  Livermore  National  Laboratories 
LLNL  one-dimensional  time-to-explosion  ODTX  experiments  Sandia  National 
Laboratories SNL instrumented thermal ignition experiments SITI and Los Alamos 
National  Laboratories  LANL  intermediatescale  cookoff  bucket  ISCB  experiments. 
All of the experimental data lies within the LHS prediction limits.  
The  objective  here  is  to  assess  the  predictive 
capabilities  of  this  model  using  LHS  techniques 
and  thermal  ignition  experiments  that  use  PBX 
9502 mass quantities Fig. 1 in the range of 1.8
1312  g.  The  PBX  9502  thermal  decomposition 
model  developed  by  Hobbs1  et  al.  was  fit  to  the 
ODTX  Fig.  1a  and  SITI  Fig.  1b  experiments. 
The  ODTX  experimental  data  sets  contain 
measured  times  to  explosion  and  temperatures  in 
the  aluminum  anvils2.  The  SITI  experiments3 
provide  experimental  information  on  the  PBX 
9502  internal  temperatures  the  aluminum  case 
To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email avileslanl.gov       
temperatures  and  pressure 
expansion gaps facing the top surface of the PBX 
9502  cylinders.  The  ODTX  experiments  allowed 
pressures as high as 1500 bars 22000 psi while 
the  SITI  experiments  developed  pressures  in  the 
order  of  101103  psig.  A  modified  SITI  design                      
with different expansion gaps volumes was used in 
reference  1  to  study  the  effects  of  ullage  on  the 
decomposition and ignition of PBX 9502. A more 
detailed  description  of  the  SITI  experiments  used 
in  the  development  of  this  model  is  given  in 
designed  to  investigate  safety  issues  arising  from 
the  exposure  of  the  insensitive  high  explosive 
environments.  Figure  1c  shows  the  configuration 
used  which  consist  of  two  PBX  9502  cylinders           
                  Figure.1.  Experimental  configurations for different scales and an example of blind  
                  comparisons between the Hobbs1 et al. model and the experiments.
arrangement  allows 
thermocouples to diagnose the spatial temperature 
distribution in the radial direction at the midplane 
where thermal ignition is expected to occur.  
an  excellent  source  for  blind  comparisons  tests 
that use Hobbs et al. model.  
The measured temperatures at the PBX 9502
aluminum interfaces in the ISCB experiments were 
implemented  in  the  finite  element  heat  transfer 
code  Aria5  and  used  to  simulate  the  ISCB  tests. 
The Table in Fig. 1d shows comparisons between 
the thermal ignition times  predicted by Hobbs1 et 
al.  model and the ISCB experiments. Taking into 
consideration  that  these  are  blind  comparisons 
and  that  this  model  was  fit  to  small-scale  SITI 
experiments  24  g  it  can  be  concluded  that  the 
agreement between the model predictions and the 
experiments is remarkable. 
A  brief  overview  of  the  PBX  9502  cookoff 
model  is  given  in  this  section  with  more  detail 
given  in  Ref.  1.  The  cookoff  model  consists  of 
solving  the  conductive  energy  equation  with  a 
volumetric  source  for  global  reaction  steps.  The 
first reaction considers drying of the PBX  where 
the mass fraction of adsorbed water is small. The 
Temperature  is  also  measured  on  the  outer 
surfaces  of  the  ISCB  aluminum  confinement.  A 
special  characteristic  of  the  ISCB  experiments  is 
that  temperature  was  measured  at  the  interfaces 
between  the  IHE  and  the  aluminum  confinement. 
Thermocouple  beads  were  installed  at  different 
locations  at  the  interface  between  the  cylindrical 
outer surface of the IHE and the cylindrical inner 
surface of the aluminum confinement.  
the  definition  of 
Temperature was also measured in the top and 
bottom  flat  interfaces  between  the  IHE  and  the 
temperature  measurements 
Dirichlet type boundary conditions that were used 
to  model  the  ISCB  tests.  The  ISCB  experiments 
were not used in the development of the PBX 9502 
model developed by Hobbs1 et al. This fact makes 
comparisons tests that use the Hobbs1 et al. model 
second and third reaction involves elimination of a 
water molecule from TATB to form mono-furazan 
MF which subsequently decomposes into stable 
reaction  products.  The  final  reaction  is  direct 
decomposition  of  TATB  to  form  equilibrium 
products. The four-step mechanism reads1 
          1.       H2Oa   H2Og 
          2.       TATB  MF  H2Om 
          3.       MF  6.52 gasm  4.18 carbonm 
          4.       TATB  7.5 gast  3.9 carbont 
where  subscript  a  means  adsorbed  subscript  g 
means  gaseous  subscript  m  means  coming  from 
the  mono-furazan  decomposition  and  subscript  t 
means coming from the TATB decomposition. 
The  PBX  9502  decomposition  model 
pressure  dependent  with 
the  rate  of  TATB 
decomposition  assumed  to  be  proportional  to 
PPo0.7.  Pressure  is  calculated  with  the  BKWS 
equation  of  state.  The  model  is  sensitive  to  the 
available  gas  volume.  If  PBX  9502  is  pressed  to 
high  densities  the  decomposition  gases  do  not 
readily leave the explosive. Rather decomposition 
takes place in the interior of the explosive which 
has been called closed-pore decomposition. If the 
material  is  damaged  these  gases  can  leave  the 
PBX  with  the  overall  pressure  being  lower  and 
reaction rates being lower. 
The  PBX  9502  model  has  several  options  to 
calculate the gas pressure. These options are based 
on  the  available  gas  volume  in  the  system  of 
interest. For example if the PBX is damaged the 
decomposition  gases  can  leave  the  PBX  and 
accumulate  in  the  confining  apparatus.  If  the 
confining apparatus is open to the atmosphere the 
gases leave the system and the rates are lower.  
If  the  PBX  is  not  damaged  and  pressed  to 
densities  near  the  theoretical  maximum  density 
TMD then the gases stay within the closed pore 
network  and  pressure 
increases.  The  higher 
decomposition  causes  ignition  times  to  be  short 
since reaction rates are higher. 
Intermediate scale cook-off bucket experiments 
A series of tests4  was performed at LANL at 
likelihood  of  high  explosive  violent  response 
HEVR  or  deflagration-to-detonation  transition 
DDT  for  PBX  9502  and  to  provide  time-toignition temperature and pressure data for cookoff 
configurations were designed.  
the  effect  of  ventilation 
The  first  was  sealed  gas  tight  and  had  low 
ullage i.e. free volume to accommodate thermal 
expansion  of  the  IHE.  The  second  was  vented  to 
the atmosphere and also had low ullage. The third 
configuration included an attached reservoir and a 
calibrated  pressure-relief  burst  disk  blocking  a 
vent  path  to  the  atmosphere.  This  configuration 
was  intended  to  represent  a  sealed  system  with 
higher  ullage  where  gases  can  accumulate  and 
obtain intermediate pressures.  The burst disk was 
included  to  capture  the  effect  of  partial  casing 
relaxation of the intermediate pressure condition. 
The  third  and  first  configurations  were  used 
for this validation study. The third configuration is 
shown  in  Fig.  2  and  the  first  configuration  is 
shown in Fig. 3. The ISCB tests were instrumented 
with  external  and  internal  thermocouples.  The 
internal  thermocouples  were  used  to  define  the 
finite  element  model  boundary  conditions  on  the 
outer  surfaces  of  the  PBX  9502  cylinders  and  to 
compare  the  response  of  the  model  with  the 
measured temperatures at the mid-plane of the IHE 
Thermocouples were installed at the interface 
between  the  aluminum  confinement  and  the  PBX 
9502  cylinders.  The  temperatures  measured  by 
these  thermocouples  were  used  to  define  3dimensional Dirichlet type boundary conditions on 
the  outer  surfaces  of  the  PBX  9502  cylinders. 
These boundary conditions were incorporated into 
the  PBX  9502  finite  element  model5  through 
interpolation  to  define  the  IHE  outer  surfaces 
nodal  temperatures  as  functions  of  time  and 
CONFIGURATION 3 SEALED HIGHER VOLUME
Thermocouple feedthrough fitting
500 mL Reservoir Volume
2 pieces each 3dia. x 3 height
Figure 2. Bucket test configuration 3 with the reservoir tank burst-disk assembly and pressure transducer. 
This was used with the second and sixth ISCB tests. 
Sensitivity analysis using the ISCB experiments  
Three  dimensional  finite  element  models  of 
the IHE in four ISCB experiments were used with 
a LHS technique6 to estimate the uncertainty in the 
ignition.  The  configuration  of 
experiments is given in Table 1.  
     Table 1. Simulated ISCB tests. 
Configuration   Reservoir 
         Figure 3. Bucket test configuration 1  
Table  3.  Parameters  correlation  coefficient  for   
aThis is Pearsons correlation coefficient. 
Figure 4 a shows the measured temperature at 
the  center  of  the  IHE  the  center  temperatures 
predicted  by  Hobbs  et  al.  model  and  the  20 
temperature  profiles  produced  by  the  20  LHS 
simulations    for   ISCB   experiment    1. The 
initial  adsorbed  water  multipliers  for  the  20  LHS 
samples  are  also  shown  in  Fig.  4  b.  Figure  4  b 
exhibits a linear trend with the amount of adsorbed 
water giving a correlation coefficient of -0.94. 
decreases since the PBX has more adsorbed water. 
This  will  increase  the  formation  of  water  vapor 
produced  by  reaction  1.  The  increase  in  water 
the  pressure  which 
subsequently  will  increase  reaction  rate  4.  A 
higher reaction rate 4 will lead to a faster thermal 
ignition.  A  similar  trend  is  observed  for  the 
uncertainty range Uh2 which has correlations of  0.76  and  -0.73  for  ISCB  experiments    2  and  6 
respectively. The uncertainty range Uh2 influences 
the  formation  of  H2Om  in  reaction  2  of  the 
The  LHS  samples  used  by  the  model  were 
generated  using  a  sensitivity  analysis  software 
called DAKOTA7 and the values of the parameter 
uncertainties were taken from reference 1.  Table 2 
shows  the  uncertainty  multipliers  and  the  kinetic 
parameters  considered.  All  of  the  uncertainties 
values were uniformly distributed.  
Table 2.  Parameters uncertainty multipliers 
Volumetric expansion 
Reaction 1 enthalpy 
Reaction 2 enthalpy 
Reaction 3 enthalpy 
Reaction 4 enthalpy 
Thermal conductivity 
Initial bulk density 
Initial temperature 
Initial adsorbed water 
This is an uncertainty range 
the  Pearson  correlation 
coefficient  between  the  ignition  time  and  the 
parameters for the ISCB experiments 1 2 5 and 
6. The uncertainty in the initial adsorbed water had 
the highest correlations of -0.94152 -0.41986 and 
-0.92018  for  ISCB  experiments  1  2  and  5 
The  heat  of  reaction  of  the  mono-furazan 
formation  reaction  is  also  highly  correlated  with 
values  of  -0.76029  and  -0.73352  for  the  ISCB 
experiments  2  and  6  respectively.  Also  only  for 
ISCB experiment  2 the reaction rate 2 came up 
mildly correlated with    a correlation coefficient of 
-0.37240.  The  rest  of  the  correlation  coefficients 
are  smaller  than  0.37  and  not  significant.  The 
the  highest  correlation  are 
highlighted in Tables 36.  
a First ISCB Experiment
LHS temperatures at IHE center
Predicted center temperatures
PBX 9502 center thermocouple
External mid-plane temperatures
Figure 4.  a  Simulations  of  the  20 LHS  samples  for  the  first ISCB experiment. b Parameter with 
the highest correlation Uh2oa.  
Table  4.  Parameters  correlation  coefficient  for   
Table  5.  Parameters  correlation  coefficient  for   
Table  6.  Parameters  correlation  coefficient  for   
ODTX simulation uncertainty 
Figure  5  shows  both  predicted  lines  and 
measured2  symbols  ignition  times  of  PBX  9502 
in  the  ODTX  apparatus.  In  Fig.  5  the  large 
symbols  are  for  a  sealed  configuration 
includes a copper seal. The smaller symbols in Fig. 
5 are for a  vented configuration  wherein Koerner 
et al.2 left the copper o-ring  out of the apparatus. 
Figure 5.a is for 98TMD PBX 9502 and Figure 
5.b is for 85TMD PBX 9502.  
       Fig. 5 ODTX ignition plot with data from 2. 
The 20 LHS simulations of ignition times are 
shown  in  Fig.  5  for  both  sealed  PBX  9502  at 
98TMD  and  85TMD.  The  best  agreement 
between the data and model are for the sealed PBX 
at both 98TMD and 85TMD. The unconfined 
ODTX  runs  look  similar  to  the  confined  ODTX 
The data does not show as strong correlation 
with  confinement  as  the  model.  We  suspect  that 
the plastic bonded explosive may self seal at high 
temperatures.  A  better  method  of  venting  gases 
and  measuring  pressure  in  the  ODTX  experiment 
The  vented  simulations  for  the  ODTX  were 
simply  run  by  changing  the  pressure  exponent  to 
zero and causing the reaction rates to slow down. 
We  ran  full  LHS  analysis  of  both  the  98TMD 
and 85 TMD vented cases and got essentially the 
same results  which are plotted  with  blue lines in 
Table  7  lists  the  correlation  coefficients  for 
the vented ODTX runs at a boundary temperature 
of  625  K  where  1000T  is  1.6.  We  chose  this 
temperature because it gives the most variation in 
the  LHS  run.  Again  the  reaction  enthalpy  for  the 
mono-furazan formation is most sensitive. 
Table  7.  Parameters  correlation  coefficient  for   
unconfined ODTX predictions at 625 K. 
SITI simulation uncertainty 
Figure  6  shows  both  predicted  lines  and 
measured1 symbols ignition times for PBX 9502 
in the SITI apparatus.  The triangle symbols are for 
98 TMD sealed experiments. The circle symbols 
are for 38 TMD vented experiments. The purple 
lines represent the 20 LHS runs for the 38 TMD 
vented  SITI  experiments  predicted  by  setting  the 
pressure exponent to zero.  
    Fig. 6. SITI ignition plot with data from 1. 
Table  8.  Parameters  correlation  coefficient  for   
unconfined SITI predictions at 573.5 K. 
The  black  and  orange  lines  are  two  separate 
LHS predictions of the 98 TMD SITI runs. The 
predictions with the orange lines assume the PBX 
increases in volume due to both thermal expansion 
to  gas  generation.  The 
predictions  with  the  black  lines  assume  that  the 
bulk  volume  change  is  only  due  to  thermal 
Table  8  lists  the  correlation  coefficients  for 
the vented SITI runs at a boundary temperature of 
573.5  K  where  1000T  is  1.74.  We  chose  this 
temperature because it gives the most variation in 
the  LHS  run.  Again  the  reaction  enthalpy  for  the 
mono-furazan formation is most sensitive. 
Discussion of results 
In the current work we have used a pressure 
dependent thermal decomposition model to predict 
the thermal response and eventual cookoff of PBX 
9502.  We  have  simulated  the  response  of  the 
ODTX  experiment  2  g  the  SITI  experiment 
22 g and the ISCB test 1300 g.  The model 
parameters were originally obtained from the SITI 
experiments.  The  ODTX  and  ISCB  experiments 
are  considered  validation  experiments  since  they 
were not used to obtain model parameters. 
The ODTX experiment was both confined and 
vented  although  we  suspect  that  the  plastic 
bonded explosive may have self-sealed at elevated 
temperatures.  We  recommend  additional  ODTX 
experiments  with  better  venting  and  pressure 
measurements.  We  believe  the  model  predictions 
of  the  effect  of  density  from  98  TMD  sealed 
ODTX  tests  to  85  TMD  vented  experiments 
were predicted adequately. 
The model fit the  high-density confined SITI 
experiments as well as the low-density vented SITI 
experiments.  The  model  has  an  option  of 
predicting  bulk  volume  changes  by 
expansion  as  well  as  decomposition  gas  induced 
swelling. The swelling model was added after the 
model  was  fit  to  the  SITI  data.  Additional 
experiments  are  needed  to  improve  the  swelling 
model for more accurate predictions. 
     The average of the 20 LHS ignition times and 
one standard deviation for ISCB experiments  1 
2 5 and 6 was 22941 s 987 s 34360 s 1127 s 
19922 s 652 s and 22912 s 972 s respectively. 
Table  9  shows  a  comparison  of  these  averages 
with the measured times to thermal ignition.  
Table  9.  Measured 
averages for the ISCB experiments.    
24372  35414  22449  22982 
22941  34360  19922  22912 
        Figures  7-10  show  comparisons  of 
temperatures predicted by Hobbs et al. model with 
the measurements at the center of the PBX 9502. 
External mid-plane temperatures
PBX 9502 center thermocouple
Predicted temperature at center
Predicted temperature at center
PBX 9502 center thermocouple
PBX 9502 outer surface thermocouple
Figure 9.    Temperatures predicted by Hobbs et al. 
model at the center of the PBX 9502 cylinder for 
Predicted temperature at center
PBX 9502 center thermocouple
PBX 9502 outer surface thermocouple
Figure 10.  Temperatures predicted by Hobbs et al. 
model at the center of the PBX 9502 cylinder for 
The  model  fit  the  ISCB  experiments  which 
used about 1300 g of PBX 9502. This is more than    
50  times  the  amount  of  explosive  in  the  SITI 
experiments and more than 650 times the amount 
of  explosive  in  the  ODTX  experiments.  We 
believe  that  we  have  successfully  used  the  PBX 
9502 model to scale-up to practical geometries. 
Summary and conclusions 
The parameters that affect the time to ignition 
the most are the mass fraction of adsorbed water 
which  can  be  measured  accurately.  We  used  a 
Figure 7.    Temperatures predicted by Hobbs et al. 
model at the center of the PBX 9502 cylinder for 
Predicted temperature at center
PBX 9502 center thermocouple
PBX 9502 outer surface thermocouple
Figure 8.    Temperatures predicted by Hobbs et al. 
model at the center of the PBX 9502 cylinder for 
constant  value  based  on  measurements  from 
Glascoe  et  al.8  We  also  found  that  the  reaction 
enthalpy  as  well  as  the  reaction  rate  for  water 
forming  mono-furazan  was  also 
The soak temperatures on the outer surface of 
the  aluminum  confinement  were  249  C  and  255 
C for the ISCB experiments 1 and 5 respectively. 
In contrast for the ISCB experiments 2 and 6 the 
soak boundary temperatures were 261 C and 270 
C respectively. This difference in soak boundary 
temperatures  caused  the  switch  of  the  most 
correlated  parameter  from  the  initial  adsorbed 
water to the reaction enthalpy of the mono-furazan 
formation.  At  higher  boundary  temperatures  the 
formation  reaction  2  produces 
higher concentrations of water vapor H2Om which 
have  a  more  significant  influence  on  the  increase 
in pressure that leads to a faster ignition. Figure 11 
compares the concentrations of H2Og and H2Om at 
the center of the IHE for the 18th LHS simulation 
of ISCB experiment  6 
H2Om concentration produced by mono-furazan formation reaction
H2Og concentration produced by drying reaction 1 of the mechanism
Figure 11. Concentrations of H2Og and H2Om at the 
center  of  the  IHE  for  the  18th  LHS  simulation  of 
ISCB experiment  6. 
        Note  from  Fig.  11  that  the  rate  of  H2Om 
production increases for times greater than 20000 
s. At lower boundary temperatures the production 
of  H2Og  has  a  more  significant  influence  on  the 
increase in the pressure that leads to ignition which 
is the case of ISCB experiments 1 and 5. 
The  pressure  dependent 
depends  on  the  volume  generated  via  thermal 
expansion and reaction. The amount of accessible 
gas volume is unknown and we attempt to model 
this  using  empirical  expansion  and  swelling 
assumptions.  What  is  needed  is  a  reactive  elastic 
plastic  constitutive  model 
evolution  of  porosity  and  permeability  which  is 
beyond the scope of the current work. A Mesh-free DSD Front Tracker for an Arbitrary HE Boundary 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore California U.S.A 
Abstract.  A new mesh-free DSD front tracker that explicitly solves the detonation front 
propagation  is  implemented  for  an  arbitrarily  specified  HE  boundary.  Compared  to 
previously existing mesh-based DSD implementations the new method has advantages of 
reduced cost improved accuracy minimized data space and enhanced capabilities.  The 
new DSD front tracker puts marked particles on the HE front and tracks the motion of the 
particles in the front normal direction governed by a time-dependent ODE system. The 
difficulty  associated  with  an  implicit  DSD  boundary  treatment  is  much  reduced  by  an 
explicit  methodology  for  arbitrarily  specified  HE  boundary  geometry.  The  issue 
associated with the change of front topology is resolved with an efficient local inclusion 
test. Particles are redistributed on the front to maintain the desired resolution. This DSD 
front tracker has been validated with comparisons to exact and reactive flow solutions of 
rate-stick problems. In addition it has been shown capable for dead-zone simulation.  
Programmed  HE  burn  with  a  detonation  shock 
dynamics DSD model is an efficient method for 
the lighting time calculation compared to reactive 
flow modeling which requires high resolution for 
the  reaction  zone.  Existing  DSD  implementations 
solve  for  the  level-set  PDE  or  some  equivalent 
PDE with a mesh and apply an angle condition on 
the  HEinert  boundary.  Among  the  existing  DSD 
algorithms  a  finite-difference  method  can  be 
easily  performed  on  a  Cartesian  mesh.  However 
treatment  becomes  complicated 
because  both  the  detonation  front  and  the  HE 
boundary  are  implicitly  defined  1  2.  With  a 
renormalization of the distance field a narrowband 
methodology  can  reduce  the  cost  but  would  not 
converge to the true solution with even a relatively 
trivial concave geometry  3. Another method using 
a least-squared fitting of the lighting front and an 
existing  hydro  mesh  is  also  implemented  in  a 
narrowband fashion but the boundary condition is 
still difficult to apply even when the HE boundary 
is explicitly specified with a body-fitting mesh 4. 
Because mesh resolution cannot be adjusted local 
high  curvature  regions  cannot  be  resolved  with  a 
mesh-based  DSD  method.  In  addition  a  meshbased method requires relatively big storage space.  
To reduce the difficulties mentioned above a DSD 
algorithm  with  both  the  detonation  front  and  the 
HE  boundary  explicitly  expressed  becomes 
desirable.  Such  a  method  may  provide  an  easier 
boundary treatment an adjustable local resolution 
for a more accurate and a more efficient solution 
with a smaller data space. 
Recently we have implemented a mesh-free DSD 
arbitrarily  specified  HE  boundary.  The  new 
detonation  front  according 
tracks  particles  distributed  on 
tracker  called  SDOT 
curvature  law  with  a  curved  fitting  of  neighbor 
particle positions to express local front geometry. 
The  DSD  boundary  angle  condition  is  used  to 
explicitly  derive  the  position  of  a  boundary 
particle.  The  challenge  with  topology  change  is 
treated  by  dropping  lit  or  run  out  of  boundary 
particles  and  reassigning  neighbors  to  particles 
that  have  lost  neighbors.  A  redistribution  of 
particles  is  performed  with  a  condition  based  on 
distance or curvature to maintain the front quality.  
With the new algorithm there is no need to solve 
the governing nonlinear PDE as with the previous 
implemented DSD methods. Instead a set of timedependent ODEs derived from the DSD evolution 
equation  5  is  solved  for  advancing  a  detonation 
front.  This PDE to ODE conversion is third order 
accurate in space and introduces no error in time.  
In  this  article  we  will  describe  the  mathematical 
aspects and numerical techniques for front motion 
topology change boundary treatment and surface 
management  associated  with  this  mesh-less  DSD 
front  tracker.  Some  2D  numerical  examples  that 
verify and validate the new method then follow.   
HE  Boundary  Presentation  with  Fixed  Control 
Points that Define Boundary Faces 
In  practice  boundary  geometry  usually  can  be 
specified with a set of control points and a rule to 
connect  them  and  define  boundary  faces.  For 
example the rate-stick geometry can be described 
with four control points that define four faces. To 
define  a  boundary  in  two-dimensions  the  control 
points  can  be  ordered  counter-clock-wise  with 
each  pair  of  two  consecutive  points  defining  a 
boundary  face.  A  face  can  be  planar  or  curved 
depending  on  whether  continuity  of  slope  at  a 
control  point  is  in  consideration.  In  an  axisymmetrical geometry the faces are the faces in 
two-dimensions  revolved  around  the  axis.  Rather 
complicated  boundary  geometry  may  be  defined 
with a small set of control points this can be seen 
with  the  numerical  examples  in  this  article.  The 
smallness of boundary data is usually true in threedimensions as well. 
Burn Front Representation with Particles and a 
Distance-based Neighbor Relationship 
A  detonation  front  at  a  time  step  is  presented  by 
particles  distributed  on  the  front  fig.  1.    To 
completely describe a given detonation front it is 
sufficient  to  associate  each  particle  with  a  unit 
normal vector. The local geometry of a front at a 
particle is defined by itself and its neighbors. 
We  select  the  neighbors  based  on  the  distance 
between  particles.  We  specify  a  search-length  s 
which  may  be  the  desired  resolution  for  the 
problem. At a given time step a particle looks for 
particles within the distance s as neighbors. At the 
next time-step some neighbor particles may move 
into or out of the neighborhood of a given particle. 
This can be dealt locally by old neighbor relations. 
Each particle is assigned a unit normal vector for 
their  direction  of  motion.  Our  choice  is  to  fit  a 
plane in 3D or a line in 2D with local particle 
positions to find the normal and adjust it later with 
a  curved-fitting.  The  orientation  of  the  normal  is 
determined  by  specifying  the  order  of  neighbor 
particles. In 2D a particle carries a left and a right 
neighbor  to  define  the  orientation.  In  3D  its 
neighbor  particles  are  ordered  counter-clock-wise 
by their projections on the fitting plane.    
Fig.1.  Particle  presentation  of  a  local  detonation 
front  in  3D  is  shown.  Vectors  are  in  the  normal 
direction of propagation of the detonation. 
Front Motion with a PDE to ODE Conversion of 
the Equation of Motion of a Detonation  
A  given  particle  P  on  detonation  front  moves  in 
the normal direction with a velocity Dn subscript 
n  for  normal  computed  from  a  given  Dn- 
relation.  The  front  curvature    is  obtained  from 
fitting  a  curved  surface  to  neighbor  particle 
positions in the surface normal coordinate defined 
To  the  leading  order  approximation  the  DSD 
theory predicts that Dn the detonation velocity in 
the  normal  direction  is  a  function  of  the  front 
curvature    i.e.  Dn    Dn.  The  motion  of  the 
front is described by a partial differential equation  
Fig.2.  The  local  front  normal  coordinate  for  a 
given  particle  P.  The  front  geometry  is  defined 
with  a  quadratic  fitting  with  neighbor  particles 
filled  circles  within  a  distance  s  to  P.  Unfilled 
circles mark particles that are not neighbors of P.  
In  the  equation  above  the  surface 
defines the position of the front in space and time. 
The proposed method does not solve the level-sets 
it merely tracks the geometry of the front in time.  
The  normal  vector  at  a  particle  P  on  the  front 
dimensions  a  local  Cartesian-coordinate  system 
 can be defined by setting the origin at 
P with its normal being the n-axis -axis and axis are the principal tangential unit vectors of the 
fitting. In this intrinsic normal coordinate the front 
geometry  can  be  generally  expressed  by  n    
h  in a neighborhood of P. Here we assume 
the  surface  that  represents  a  detonation  front  is 
sufficiently  smooth  to  define  a  curvature.  Such  a 
surface  may  take  the  form  of  a  Taylor  expansion 
with  a  third  order  spatial  accuracy  in  the  format    
Where  the  coefficients  a  b  c  d  e  and  f  are 
considered  functions  of  time  carrying  the  change 
of geometry of the detonation front. To the order 
we  care  about  the  local  geometry  would  have 
symmetry  about  the  n-axis  when  the  coordinate
A  reduced  form  of  the  front  expansion  eq.  2  in 
the surface normal coordinate can be derived. Let 
us  consider  the  time  t    T0.  Without  loss  of 
generality  T0  can  be  set  to  0.  Because  the  front 
passes the origin one must have f 0  0.  
We compute the normal vector at the origin with 
our choice of n  h  using eq. 2. This normal 
At the origin 0 0 0 the normal must have only 
the n-component therefore we also have d0  0 
and  e0    0.  We  set  b0    0  for 
defined with the principal curvatures.   
To track the motion of a particle initially put at the 
origin  we  substitute    n    h   into  the 
equation  of  motion  eq.  1  then  take  arbitrarily 
small    and    and  expand  the  equation  to  third 
order.  With  some  algebraic  manipulations  the 
equation of motion is reduced to a set of ODEs   
The  motion  of  a  particle  P  is  governed  by  the 
ODEs  derived  above  to  third  order  in  space 
without introducing error in time. The local front 
geometry is symmetric about the n-axis. For each 
marked  particle  P  on  the  detonation  front  a 
corresponding local surface normal coordinate can 
be  defined.    The  curvature   at  a  particle  is  then    
 ac. The quadratic front fitting to the positions 
of neighbor particles is performed at the beginning 
of each time step. An ODE integrator can be used 
to  update  the  position  of  a  particle  at  the  end  of 
this time-step with a high accuracy in time.  
Local Linear Stability and Time-steps 
For  a  near  CJ  diverging  detonation  wave  the 
curvature  is  positive  and  the  detonation  speed  is 
below  its  CJ  value.  In  this  case  a  linear  stability 
analysis  of  the  ODE  system  shows  negative 
growth factors. The time integration is then stable. 
For  a  converging  detonation  we  take  the  CJ 
velocity to propagate the detonation and there is no 
uncontrolled  growth  introduced  with  this  choice.  
Rearranging  particles  tends  to  smooth  the  front 
and this would also help to stabilize this numerical 
scheme. However the time step should be limited 
in  order  to  avoid  unnecessary  reordering  of 
neighbor  particles.  For  the  purpose  of  testing  we 
have  taken  constant  time  steps.  We  have  not 
performed a global linear stability analysis for the 
new  tracking  algorithm.  However  we  believe  the 
stability condition derived in 1 is a sensible choice 
for limiting the time steps. 
Treatment  of  Topology  Change  with  an 
Inclusion Test Utilizing a Cartesian Virtual Grid 
The  information  about  if  a  marked  particle  has 
moved out of the boundary or into a burned region 
has  to  be  provided  by  an  inclusion  test.  Directly 
applying conventional inclusion tests in the case of 
many  points  is  inefficient.  We  have  implemented 
an inclusion test based on locality to improve the 
We  choose  a  length-unit  lc  to  scale  the  inclusion 
problem.  After  dividing  coordinates  by  lc  each 
particle is contained in a unit cube i i1 j j1 
k k1 with i j k being the integer floor values 
of the coordinates of the particle position.  
The  virtual-cubes  that  contain  the  HE  boundary 
are  identified  by  finding  the  intersections  of  the 
unit  cubes  and  the  boundary  fig.  3.  We  have 
implemented  a  directional-walking  intersection 
algorithm6  for  boundaries  consists  of  planar  or 
Hermite  cubic  spline  faces.    We  perform  a  local 
quadratic  fit  to  a  detonation  front  to  compute  its 
intersection  with  unit  cubes.  When  a  particle  is 
located  in  a  cube  that  is  sliced  by  either  the  HE 
boundary  or  the  detonation  front  we  check  its 
relative position to the boundary or front with a 
those  particles  contained 
local inclusion test inside this unit cube only. This 
approach makes the inclusion test very efficient. 
The size of a virtual cube lc should be a fraction of 
the volume of the HE region divided by its surface 
boundary  cubes  the  cubes  crossed  by  boundary 
need  to  be  tested  for  inclusion  with  only  the 
boundary faces that cross the cube contains a given 
particle. These virtual cubes can be used later for a 
local  neighbor  search  to  help  an  interpolation  of 
lighting  times.  Because  only  those  virtual  cubes 
crossed by boundary and front need to be stored at 
any given time-step the data storage for the virtual 
cubes is also very small.   
Fig. 3. Utilizing background virtual cubes only the 
particles contained in the boundary cubes need to 
be  test  for  inclusion  with  the  boundary  faces 
crossing a cube that contains a given particle. Each 
virtual cube is a unit one after scaling by lc. 
We  have  the  choice  to  handle  the  frontfront 
frontboundary interactions with exact geometrical 
intersection.  New  particles  can  be  put  on  the 
intersection  to  define  the  front  after  interaction 
with  sharpness.  The  resulting  high  accuracy  is 
another  advantage  compared  to  a  mesh-based 
PDE-solving DSD algorithm for which would not 
be able to capture the sharp front-features. 
Boundary  Treatment  with  Explicitly  Applying 
the DSD Boundary-Angle Condition  
For a boundary particle in two-dimensions its two 
nearest  inner  neighbor  particles  can  be  used  to 
construct a circle that intersects the boundary with 
a DSD wall-angle c. The boundary particle is put 
at the intersection fig. 4. In three-dimensions the 
idea  is  similar  fit  for  each  boundary  particle  a 
quadratic surface with the updated positions of its 
interior neighbors with an angle constraint applied 
at the intersection of the front and the boundary.  
The associated algebra is not hard to perform for 
planar boundary geometry.  For a curved boundary 
the  solution  is  a  bit  harder  to  handle  but  a  local 
planar fitting of the boundary can be done for an 
approximate  solution.  A  finer  solution  would 
require iterations. 
Fig. 4. A circle that passes interior neighbors A B 
and intersects the boundary with the DSD angle c 
is constructed to locate boundary particle C. 
In  three-dimensions  the  DSD  angular  boundary 
condition  is  to  be  applied  in  a  plane  that  is 
perpendicular  to  the  boundary  and  contains  the 
front normal vector.   
Front  Management  with  Adding  Deleting  and 
RelaxingRearranging the Particles 
As a principle we drop particles that move out of 
boundary  or  into  burned  regions.  Currently  we 
choose to control the resolution with a length  as 
the desired size of a face. In two-dimensions this 
can  be  simply  done  by  setting  the  number  of 
particles on a piece of front of an arc-length L to 
the integer portion of  L divided by  then evenly 
particles can also be performed by a relaxation rule 
based on curvature such as   const where   is 
the  dimension  of  a  face  of  the  front.  A  curvature 
based  distribution  of  particles  allows  a  variable 
resolution  and  improves  accuracy  in  regions  of 
higher curvature. Relaxation based on distance or 
curvature can be performed in 3D as well. 
the  particles.  Rearrangement  of 
Local  insertion  of  particles  for  maintaining  the 
distance  between  nearest  particles  can  always  be 
performed  with  a  desired  front  resolution.  The 
associated search of nearest particles by a searchlength is local with the neighbor information. 
Fig. 5. Particles out of boundary or into lit regions 
identified  with  the  inclusion  test  after  being 
advanced for a time-step are to be dropped. New 
particles are put at the intersections. As a result the 
solution naturally keeps its sharpness.   
The procedure described above is iterated until the 
entire HE region is lit. 
A Small Data Space  with a Reduced Complexity  
In practice only an ignorable storage is needed for 
specifying the boundary geometry. Furthermore at 
any  time  step  the  information  needed  to  advance 
the  front  is  carried  by  only  the  positions  of 
particles  on  the  current  front.  Compared  with  a 
mesh-based DSD method the spatial complexity is 
reduced  by  a  dimension.  Furthermore 
proposed  method  has  third-order  accuracy  in 
space  thus  a  high  resolution  is  not  necessary 
unless  a  local  high  front  curvature  needs  to  be 
resolved. Since the spatial complexity is reduced a 
minimal  data  space  is  required  to  store  only  the 
boundary geometry the current particle positions 
and the virtual cubes that are crossed by the front 
and the boundary to advance the detonation front. 
Parallelization  is  possibly  not  needed  for  even  a 
rather big problem. 
Supply Lighting Times with Local Interpolations  
The  marked  particles  distributed  on  the  front  at 
each  time-step  i.e.  time  contours  provides  a 
table  of  lighting  times.  In  a  hydro  simulation  a 
lighting time can be assigned at each HE node or 
zone-center from  the  data  carried by  the marked 
particles.  This  is  achieved  by  utilizing  the  virtual 
cubes  for  a  local  neighbor  search  of  particles  for 
interpolation.  A  lighting  time  interpolation  for  a 
PBX-9502 HE lighting problem is shown in fig 6.  
Fig.  7.  Detonation  fronts  lighting  time  contours 
obtained with the particle DSD front tracker. With 
Dn  1  0.2 and a boundary angle c  3. 
Example  B  with  a  Zigzag  HE  Channel  and 
Multiple Detonation Sources 
The HE region has a boundary consists of planar 
faces in fig. 8. Twelve control-points are used to 
define  this  zigzag  geometry.  The  same  DSD 
parameters used in the last example are employed 
with  three  initial  detonation  sources.  The  front 
successfully  made  turns  around  corners  and  kept 
intersecting  the  boundary  at  a  45  degree  angle. 
This geometry is more difficult with applying the 
boundary  condition  because  the  boundary  is  not 
differentiable at corners. Exact intersection is used 
for  front  interactions  and  sharp  features  are 
Fig. 8. The propagationinteraction of detonations 
in  a  zigzag  channel  is  simulated  with  this  meshless DSD front tracker. Sharp solution is obtained. 
Fig.6.  The  particle  solution  for  a  PBX-9502 
circular  channel  detonation  is  converted  into 
lighting  times  on  a  mesh  with  a  locally  quartic 
least-squared  interpolation.  The  DSD  boundary 
angle is set to  3. 
Numerical Examples with Arbitrary Boundaries 
Example A with a Curved Geometry 
As show in fig. 7 the boundary of the HE region 
has a shape of a star-fish. With a mesh based DSD 
calculation  many  nodes  would  be  needed  to 
present  such  a  curved  boundary.  Here  we 
employed only ten control points. A boundary face 
here is a piece of a Hermite cubic-spline curve that 
ensures  smoothness  of  the  boundary.  Only  10 
boundary control points are employed to define the 
The Dn- relation is taken to Dn  1  0.2 and the 
DSD boundary angle is set to  3. The lighting 
starts with 30 particles evenly distributed on a flat 
detonation front. The front successfully turns over 
the concave boundary and expands into the center. 
Particles are redistributed at times for keeping the 
initial resolution. When the front hits the boundary 
again  some  particles  become  exterior  and  are 
dropped. This procedure repeats itself until all the 
fronts become smaller than a preset tolerance.  
Example C a  Simple Dead-Zone Simulation 
The DSD theory predicts that when the detonation 
front  curvature  exceeds  a  critical  value  the 
detonation speed arrives at a failure value and the 
corresponding detonation will not propagate. In a 
corner-turning test a high curvature cusp appears 
at  the  corner  and  a  dead  zone  is  defined  by  the 
trace  of  the  cusp.  The  cusp  moves  in  the  normal 
direction with the failure velocity for continuity of 
the speed. Tracing this cusp after it is formed with 
the  proposed  algorithm  with  the  same  DSD 
parameters used for example B a clear dead-zone 
structure appears fig. 9. The boundary geometry 
is defined with only six control-points. 
Fig.9.  A  initially  flat  detonation  starts  from  the 
bottom.  A  dead-zone  is  naturally  formed  with 
tracing the high curvature cusp started near the 
corner.  The  cusp  moves  in  the  front  normal 
direction with a failure speed 0.9.  
Validation of our Mesh-less DSD Tracker 
We  first  verified  our  implementation  of  the  new 
method  with  rate-stick  geometry  and  an  exact 
DSD  solution  for  a  linear  Dn-  relation.  Let  the 
width of the stick be 2R taking DCJ as the velocity 
unit  then Dn    1       R  as  the  length  unit  to 
scale  the  system  and  c    4  the  system  has  a 
first integral in the case of 2D planar geometry  
Where  the  term  T    1    C212  C  is  the  steady 
travelling velocity. With  taken to 0.1 we obtain 
C  0.969723 which is accurately recovered to 6 
digits with this mesh-less detonation front tracker. 
We also compared numerical results obtained from 
this  particle  tracker with  reactive  flow  simulation 
CHEETAH for rate-stick problems with LX-17. 
We  numerically  derive  the  front  velocity  and 
curvature relation from the CHEETAH data. Then 
we input the derived numerical Dn- relation and 
run this DSD front tracker. An almost exact match 
of  front  shapes  between  the  particle  tracking  and 
DNS  is  obtained.  We  consider  this  result  a 
justification  for  both  our  LX-17  DSD  study  and 
our mesh-free front tracking algorithm.    
The Numerical Dn- Relationship for LX-17 
We employ a CHEETAH generated steady LX-17 
detonation  in  rate-stick  geometry  represented  by 
data-points  on  the  front.  We  evenly  divide  the 
radius  to  intervals.  At  each  joint  of  intervals  a 
search-distance      is  used  to  look  for  data-points 
within the distance . The selected data-points are 
used  to  fit  a  quadratic  curve  and  obtain  the 
curvature. The slope of the fitting curve provides 
information of the normal front velocity at a joint. 
Then we obtain a Dn  pair at each joint which 
is  a  point  on  the  Dn-  curve  for  the  LX-17  ratestick.  An  extrapolation of  the  derived  Dn-  curve 
for  small  curvature  gives  DCJ    7.73  cmms 
which is in agreement with experimental results 9. 
Fig.10. A steady detonation front in a 50 mm ratestick  test  generated  with  the  mesh-less  DSD 
tracker  dashed  curve  using  our  numerical  Dn- 
derived  for  LX-17  overlaps  the  front  obtained 
from  DNS  with  the  CHEETAH  model  solid 
Comparison with CHEETAH Rate-stick Fronts 
We run our mesh-less DSD front checker with the 
numerical  Dn- relation  derived  for  LX-17  and  a 
boundary angle of 0.4472 . The tracker generated 
a  front  visually  overlaps  the  CHEETAH  front. 
This  shows  that  a  mesh-free  DSD  tracking  can 
adequately predict the detonation arriving time. 
The  proposed  particle  DSD  front  tracker  admits 
arbitrarily specified boundary geometry. The usual 
intrinsic  numerical  difficulties  associated  with  a 
moving particle front tracker7 have been resolved 
with  basic  geometrical  operations.  The  particles 
that  present  a  detonation  front  are  rearranged  at 
times  to  avoid  non-ideal  distributions.  Particles 
can easily be added or removed from the front to 
maintain  the  quality  of  the  front  geometry.    The 
issue  with  particles  moving  into  invalid  region  is 
addressed  with  an  efficient  inclusioninteraction 
test.  Furthermore  a  sharp  solution  of  multi-front 
interaction  is  obtained  and  kept  by  this  particle 
tracker utilizing exact geometrical intersections. 
Besides  being  fast  and  accurate  the  new  DSD 
front tracker has the advantage of being compact. 
At  any  given  time  only  the  boundary  geometry 
and the front geometry are necessary to carry the 
calculation. This tracker is of high spatial accuracy 
third  order  thus  a  high  resolution  is  usually  not 
required. A local high front curvature can also be 
resolved  other  existing  DSD  methods  have 
difficulties  resolving  high  local  curvature.    The 
lighting  time  on  a  hydro  mesh  can  be  obtained 
with a local implementation of the particle data or 
even a direct measurement to the front at the run 
time. This method is validated by comparisons to 
numerical  simulation  with  a  detailed  reaction 
chemistry model for various DSD parameters. We 
conclude that this DSD tracker is capable to serve 
as  an  efficient  light  weight  tool  for  programmed 
burn with the detonation shock dynamics DSD. 
The author would like to express appreciation for 
the  guidance  and  encouragement  from  Dr.  Larry 
Fried  and  Dr.  Robert  Rieben  at  LLNL  for  the 
CHEETAH data from Dr. Peter Vitello at LLNL. 
The author also would like to thank Dr. Jim Reus 
and Dr. Frank Graziani at LLNL for reviewing the 
This work was performed under the auspices of the 
U.S.  Department  of  Energy  by  Lawrence 
Livermore  National  Laboratory  under  Contract 
DE-AC52-07NA27344.  Shock-To-Detonation Transition In Porous Low-Sensitivity High Explosives 
Ewgeny.B. Smirnov Alexander.N. Averin Boris.G. Loboiko Oleg.V. Kostitsyn Yuriy.A. Belenovsky 
Alexander.V. Lebedev Victor.N. Scherbakov Kirill.M. Prosvirnin Alexander.N. Kiselev Konstantin.V. 
Eganov Vasily.M. Volkov Vitaly.V. Kozel 
Russian Federal Nuclear Center  All-Russian Research Institute for Technical Physics named after 
Academician E.I. Zababakhin Snezhinsk Russia.  
ewgenysmirnovmail.ru 
Shock  wave  transition  into  detonation  was  registered  simultaneously  with  the  help  of 
piezo  resistive  and  radio  interferometric  techniques.  Piezo  resistive  gauges  registered 
parameters of shock wave entering the charge out of HE under study and parameters of 
shockdetonation wave coming from it. Radio interferometer registered x-t diagram of the 
process  of  shock  wave  propagation  and  its  transition  into  detonation  wave.  Detailed 
processing of trajectories of shock wave transition into detonation permitted to build Popplot only on the basis of data obtained with the help of radio interferometer i.e. without 
attracting  the  data  obtained  by  piezo  resistive  method.  Presented  diagrams  for  various 
porosities of HE under study have physically correct asymptotes. 
the  shock-to-detonation 
transition  SDT  in  the  case  of  high  explosives 
HE    initiation  are  obtained  from  experiments 
with  HE  wedge  samples 
registration of evolution in the wave pressure and 
  profiles1  3-5.  In  our  previous 
investigation 6-8 the piezoresistive 9 and radio 
interferometric  10  11  methods  were  used  to 
register  the  shock-to-detonation  transition.  The 
piezoresistive gauges registered parameters of the 
shock wave entering the test HE charge as well as 
parameters  of  the  shockdetonation  wave  leaving 
this charge. The radio interferometer registered the 
x-t  diagram  of  the  shock  wave  SW  propagation 
and  its  transition  to  detonation  wave  DV.  The 
radio interferometer an instrument used to analyze 
the  shock  wave  and  detonation  processes  has  a 
number  of  advantages.  First  HE  has  no 
incorporated gauges affecting the process. Second 
interferometer  allows  almost  continuous 
registration of the shock and detonation wave front 
propagation  that  can  be  used  to  determine  the 
depth of detonation onset. 
to  detonation.  The 
the  shock-todetonation  transition  are  processed  and  analyzed 
two  lines  are  built  up  and  their  intersection  is 
found. The inclination of the first line specifies the 
average  velocity  of  the  shock  wave  before  its 
approximates  the  x-t data  of  the  process  after  the 
detonation  onset.  This  approach  is  justified  if  the 
accuracy  of  determining  the  trajectory  of  the 
shock-to-detonation transition is low when we use 
experimental  data  are  roughly  described  at  the 
initial  portion  of  the  shock  wave  evolution  the 
the  optical  method.  Even 
study the molecular structure of individual HEs in 
conditions  of  different  temperatures  and  applied 
static  pressures  diamond  anvils.  The  structure 
porosity  varying  from  1-100  nm  is  analyzed 
using  the  small-angle  X-ray  scattering  SAXS 
methods 14. The structure with the typical size of 
0.001-1 mm is investigated with the help of the Xray microtomography XRCT 15. And the ultrasmall angle X-ray scattering method USAXS can 
be used to study the structure with the typical size 
The experiments in 14 15 demonstrate a 
considerable  change  in  the  HE  structure  with  its 
initial  porosity  and  temperature.  Both  the  initial 
size  of  pores  and  the  number  of  pores  undergo 
changes. Thus the above data on the HE structure 
in  combination  with  the  experimental  results  on 
the  shock-to-detonation  transition  enable  higherquality 
computation models. 
Our paper presents results of experimental 
shock-to-detonation 
transition  in  low-sensitivity  HE  having  various 
initial  porosity  transition  was  registered  by  the 
piezoresistive  9  and  radio  interferometric  10 
11 methods. The experimental setup is shown in 
Fig. 1  Experimental setup.  1  electric 
detonator 2  detonation barrier attenuator 3  
plane wave lens 4  active HE charge  5  inert 
barrier fluorine copper 6  test HE charge 7  
piezoresistive pickups 8   barrier fluorine 9  
interferometer waveguides 10  socket 11  
fixing system for the detonation barrier 12  
flange laminated fabric 13  spacer 
polystyrene 14  rings laminated fabric. 
transition point is determined very accurately. As a 
rule the error in determining the detonation onset 
depth  is  equal  to  no  more  than  several  percents 
this  is  rather  acceptable  for  the  researchers  and 
allows  them  to  build  up  a  reliable  Pop-plot 
diagram. In certain cases the shock wave velocity 
is  constant  up  to  the  point  of  transition  to 
detonation  and  this  complies  with  the  physics  of 
investigations  6-8  of  the  low-porosity  and  lowsensitivity HE revealed the propagation velocity in 
the  pre-detonation  mode  of  the  HE  explosive 
to  be  constant  approximately 
0.7 of the stationary velocity of detonation.  
for  numerical  simulation 
require  the  trajectories  of  the  shock-to-detonation 
transition  to  be  accurately  determined.  So  we 
applied  the  approach  described  by  L.G. Hill  and 
R.L. Gustavsen in 12. This approach is based on 
theoretical  considerations  of  the  extended  theory 
on  the  dynamics  of  shock  detonation  DSD 
consolidated in B.J. Yao and D.S. Stewart in 13. 
Approximations based on this approach describe in 
detail the experimental data expand the sphere of 
their  application  in  terms  of  computation  model 
calibration as well as help to investigate physical 
mechanisms of initiation. 
As  for  the  accuracy  the  study  of  the 
initiation process obviously has certain limitations 
without  detailed  data  on  the  test  HE.  And  at 
present  physical  structure  of  the  HE  having 
different initial porosity as well as how structure 
depends  on  temperature  remain  to  be  poorly 
required data on the HE structure with the help of 
the X-ray diffraction analysis XRD and electron 
microscopy EMS as well as  synchrotron X-ray 
methods  jointly  with  institutions  of  the  RAS 
Siberian branch.  In cooperation with Lavrentiev 
Institute of Hydrodynamics RAS Siberian Branch 
Institute  of  Chemistry  of  Solids  RAS  Siberian 
Branch and Institute of Nuclear Physics RAS the 
VEPP-3    accelerator  of  synchrotron  radiation  is 
used  for  non-destructive  distant  measurements  of 
the  initial-explosive  structure.  These  experiments 
help  to  determine  pore  size  distribution  and  how 
this  distribution  changes  under  different  initial 
conditions.  The  XRD  method  14  was  used  to 
The test HE was loaded with shock waves 
of different intensity and duration with the help of 
the  explosive  generator  that  comprises  the  plane 
wave  lens  3  the  30-mm  thick  HMX-based 
explosive  charge  4  and  the  fluorine  or  copper 
barrier  attenuator  5.  The  loading  device  had 
120  mm  in  diameter.  The  shock-wave  generator 
was calibrated in previous experiments 6-7. The 
loading  device  allowed  the  shock  waves  with  the 
amplitude  varying  from  6  to  30  GPa  to  be 
generated  in  the  test  explosive  due  to  varying 
thickness of the fluoroplastic or copper barriers. 
The  HE  parts  6  had  the  following 
porosity percentages 1 1.5 2 3.5 and 
5. A copper barrier was used in the experiments 
with the explosive having 3.5 and 5 porosity. 
A  fluorine  barrier  was  used  in  the  experiments 
with  the  explosive  having  1  and  2  porosity. 
The  length  of  HE  charges  was  30  mm.  The 
ambient temperature was 202. 
In  the  experiments  the  piezoresistive 
gages 7 registered parameters of the shock wave 
entering  the  HE  charge  as  well  as  parameters  of 
the  shockdetonation  wave  leaving  this  charge. 
The  interferometer  was  used  to  register  the  x-t 
diagram  of  the  shock-to-detonation  transition  in 
HE  charges.  The  radiofrequency  signal  was 
the  experimental  setup  via 
High-precision  processing  of  the  shockto-detonation wave transition trajectories allows us 
to check validity of the approximation of the single 
curve  of  initiation  SCI  18  according  to  this 
approximation  the  initiation  shock-to-detonation 
wave  transition  is  tracing  the  curve  being  single 
for  the  given  explosive  in  the  P-x0  plane  the 
Pop-plot plane irrespective of the initial pressure 
initiating  shock  wave  profile.  This 
approximation  is  the  cornerstone  of  the  semiempirical  kinetics  Forest  Fire  a  most  widely 
used  model  of  the  reaction  rate  in  the  detonation 
wave. The proof of this  model validity is usually 
agreement between the x-t diagrams reduced to the 
same coordinate system with its center in the x0 
t0  point  being  the  shock-to-detonation  transition 
Essential  difference  in  the  run  of  the 
curves functions of the initiating shock wave front 
acceleration  for  various  parameters  of  the  shock 
wave  loading  proves  that  approximation  of  the 
single curve of initiation SCI is not valid for the 
test  explosive.  This  approximation  is  untrue  for 
discrepancy of accelerations given in Fig. 2 is also 
indicative of this fact. 
initial  porosity  of  HE 
Fig.  2    Functions  of  the  initiating  shock  wave 
front acceleration for HE of different porosity. 
The method suggested by L. G. Hill and 
R.  L.  Gustavsen  12  can  be  used  to  build  up  an 
analytic expression for the Pop-plot diagram 
Fluids V. 4 No. 4 1961 
3.  J.J.  Dick  C.A.  Forest  J.R.  Rumsay  and  W.L. 
Seitz  The  Hugoniot  and  Shock  Sensitivity  of  a 
plastic-Bonded  TATB  explosive  PBX9502 
J.Appl.Phys. vol.63 No.10 1988 pp.4881-4888. 
4. S.A. Sheffield R.L. Gustavsen and R.R. Alcon 
in  Shock  Compression  of  Condensed  Matter  - 
Conference Proceedings 505 1999 p. 1043. 
Institute  of  Physics 
5. B.G. Loboiko V.P. Filin O.V. Kostitsyn V.V. 
Shaposhnikov  S.N.  Lubyatinsky  E.B.  Smirnov 
A.B.  Syrtsov  A.V. Vershynin  A.A. Nikulin. 
Eectromagnetic  method  to  register  mass  velocity 
profiles  in  shock  and  detonation  waves.  China  - 
Russia  Workshop  New  Progress  on  Energetic 
Materials - 2004 China 2004. 
6.  E.B.  Smirnov  B.G.  Loboiko  V.P.  Filin  O.V. 
Kostitsin Yu.A. Belenovsky  A.V. Lebedev  
Scherbakov  A.G.  Mozhzhin  O.S. 
Investigation  into  the  TATB-based 
explosive  shock  wave  initiation.  IX  Zababakhin 
Scientific Talks RFNC-VNIITF Snezhinsk 2007. 
7.  E.B.  Smirnov  B.G.  Loboiko  V.P.  Filin  O.V. 
Kostitsin Yu.A. Belenovsky A.V. Lebedev  
V.N.  Scherbakov  K.M.  Prosvirin.  Shock-todetonation 
explosive.  X  Zababakhin  Scientific  Talks 
Snezhinsk March 15-19 2010. 
8.  E.B. Smirnov  A.N. Averin  B.G. Loboiko 
V.N. Scherbakov  K.V. Eganov  V.M.  Volkov 
K.M. Prosvirin  A.N. Kiselev.  The 
gradient  effect  behind  the  initiating  shock  wave 
front  on  the  depth  of  detonation  in  the  TATBbased explosive. XII Khariton Talks. Extreme state 
of matter. Detonation. Shock waves. Sarov March 
9.  B.G.  Loboiko  T.I.  Karmanova  A.T. 
Sapozhnikov  A.B.  Syrtsov  V.V.  Shaposhnikov 
at. all. Calibration of manganin sensors for shock 
  is  integral  exponential 
function12  D    detonation  velocity  am   
maximum  acceleration  Um    shock  velocity 
leading to maximum acceleration. 
All  the  values  in  expression  1  are  found 
from  approximation  by  the  nonlinear  regression 
method. Applying equation 1 and the coefficients 
found from approximation the Pop-plot curve can 
be built up based on the results of a single test. So 
diagrams  constructed  in  this  way  for  different 
porosities are given in figure 3. 
The  data  given  by 
the  piezoresisitive 
method were not needed to construct the Pop-plot 
diagrams shown in figure 3. These diagrams have 
physically  correct  asymptotes.  From  above  the 
diagrams  are  limited  by  the  detonation  velocity. 
From  below  they  are  limited  by  the  shock 
propagation velocity at the Hugoniot elastic limit. 
Initiation is impossible below this limit as the hot 
spot mechanism fails to realize at lower velocities. 
Detailed registration of the shock wave trajectory 
enables  the  initial  velocity  of  the  shock  wave 
entering the test HE to be determined with the 1 
accuracy  and  in  combination  with  the  pressure 
data    to  find  the  points  of  the  nonreactive  HE 
having different initial porosity on the Hugoniot.  
The data obtained in the above experiments 
can  be  used  to  calibrate  detonation  computation Shock Hugoniot data for different initial density of TATB-based HE using
synchrotron radiation
Alexey O. Kashkarov Eduard R. Pruuel Konstantin A. Ten
Yury A. Aminov Oleg V. Kostitsyn Alexandr K. Muzyrya and Ewgeny B. Smirnov
Russian Federal Nuclear Center All-Russian Research Institute of Technical Physics Snezhinsk Russia
Lavrentiev Institute of Hydrodynamics Novosibirsk Russia
Novosibirsk State University Novosibirsk Russia
Abstract. The work presents the results of experiments on the shock front dynamics at
polymer bonded TATB with ultrafast multi-shots one-dimensional method based on the use
of a synchrotron radiation. This method allows us to determine Hugoniot data for reactants
by registration of the direct and reected shock waves in the samples. The absence of
intensive chemical reaction is observed during the experiment.
Experimental studies of shock wave process in
high explosives HE are usually carried out to determine Hugoniots and equations of state both for
reactants and detonation products. When the intensity of shock wave is high enough for shock to
detonation transition SDT the problem to determine reactants-to-products ratio behind the shock
front arises. To exclude the inuence of chemical
reaction for example it can be possible to measure
state of reactants at the nearest to the impact zone
where the SDT process is at the initial stage.
In present report the shock response at TATBbased charges with different porosity is determined
by synchrotron radiation1 SR during the shock
wave propagation in the sample from impact boundary. This ultrafast multi-shots method allows one to
register not only the appearing shock wave but also
the state of substance behind the shock front during up to 10 s after its passing. Such information
could be used as data to make statement of presense
of intensive chemical reaction in other words SDT
process or its absence. Thus it can be determined
that the state of substance corresponds to either pure
reactants or compound of reactants with products.
The registration of the ow arising after the passing of the shock front can be done not only for determining the presence of intensive chemical reaction. When the shock wave reaches the boundary
between HE charge and its massive steel base it is
reected back. It is well known that the shock sensitivity of the porous charge of HE decreased after
loading by weak shock wave therefore the pressure
at the reected wave front could be higher than at
the single wave front and in this case the intensitive
chemical reaction might not arise.
The experimental study is devoted to X-raying by
SR beam of the HE sample during the impact by the
metal striker. The passing radiation which contains
data about amount of substance along the beam line
Fig. 1. 1 - detonator 2 - explosive lens 3 - additional charge 4 - obturator 5 - SR beam 6 - striker
7 - SR beam detector 8 - sample 9 - steel base.
is recordered by the one-dimensional multi-shots
detector. The shock front posisiton is well dened
by the signicant local attenuation of the intensity
due to the compression of substance. The metal
striker absorbes the SR radiation almost completely
hence its boundaries are well dened too. The measured thickness of the striker by the SR means must
be equal to the initial one. Otherwise that means
rotation or destruction of the striker. The intensive
chemical reaction leads to a signicant side expansion of products behind the shock front. It could be
determined by increasing of the intensity of passing
radiation at this zone.
The scheme of the experiment is shown in g. 1.
The explosive lens 2 which are initiated by the
detonator 1 makes a plane shock wave which initiates the additional charge 3. Placed at the obturator 4 the aluminium striker 6 is accelerated
by products of detonation and strike the cylindrical
sample 8 which is set on the steel base 9. Since
the striker has started the detector 7 began registration of the intensity of passing radiation of SR
The passing radiation is registered as onedimensional x-ray movie. The spacial resolution is
0.1 mm and the temporal one is 0.496 s. The
exposure time is about 1 ns. Fig. 2 shows the experimental data of intensity for the both direct and
reected shock waves. The shock front positions
and their propagation directions are marked with arrows. The zone of low intensity on the left side of
the plots comply with striker position. The results
reveal that the intensity behind the shock fronts is
relatively low which points to the compressed state
Fig. 2. 1 - direct shock wave 2 - reected shock
of substance. The experimental data for SDT process are shown in g. 3 for comparison with the
previous ones. The propagation direction of the
shock wave front is to the right. As the SDT process
evolves the ow type changing behind the front on
the left side is observed. The increase rate of intensity is lower on the left than of the other part. It is
even possible to dene the point where the intesity
of chemical reaction increases rapidly. Therefore
there is some mixture of reactants and products to
the right from this point.
The results of the experiment can be represented
as the x-t diagram for the shock front and the striker
It is possible to change the striker speed
before the impact by varying its mass. So the speed
of the striker that is neccessary to arise SDT at the
direct or reected shock waves can be determined.
To obtain parameters of compressed reactants we
use data from experiments where the SDT process
does not appear or it can be only in reected waves.
In the last case we get data for calculations only for
Fig. 3. SDT process. The shock front posisitons are
marked with arrows left for the 0 s right for the
1 s. At the 2 s the front is outside the area of the
observation. The side expansion at the left from the
point 0.3 cm is less than at the right.
Fig. 4. x-t diagramm of process.
direct wave. The SDT process in the reected wave
appears when the speed of the striker before impact
is approximately from 1.5 to 2 kms depending on
porosity of the samples. If the speed of the striker is
larger than about 2 kms the SDT would appear at
the direct wave for any prorsity of studied samples
If the speed of the striker is very low the compression in the shock wave will be not enough to obtain high contrast signals to determine the front position. So when the speed is lower than 0.5 kms
the front position cannot be derived for any prosity of the samples. Thus the range of pressure in
the front of the direct wave for which we can mea
sure state of reactants is very restricted. But at the
same time the pressure in the reected wave practically doubles and the sensitivity of previously compressed samples is lower. This enables to increase
signicantly the upper limit of the pressure for compressed state of reactants without arising intensive
The x-t diagrams obtained are used to determine
the velocities of the shock front and the striker before and after the impact which corresponds to the
mass velocity of substance behind the shock wave
according to Rankine-Hugoniot conditions. However such way of determination of mass velocity
could include a signicant systematic error. Basically the shock wave propagating to the striker
which velocity in aluminium is high occurs after
the impact. The shock wave goes to the free surface
of the striker and reects as the rarefaction wave.
This wave can reach the striker-sample boundary
in about microsecond depending on thickness of
the striker. After this the speed of the strikersample boundary becomes lower than the mass velocity. During that time only one or two experimental points on the x-t diagram are usually measured
that is insufcient to determine correctly the speed
of the striker. The larger thickness of the striker
could cause increasing the time interval before the
arrival of the expansion wave but in this case its
speed becomes lower and the gain of the additional
charge mass to increase strikers speed is resulted in
the bulk debris. They would move faster than the
striker and cause trouble to correct registration of
In this paper we take into account the expansion wave by the construction of a parametric equation of states EOS for HE like the Mie-Gruneisen
one which is used to solve one-dimension Riemann
problem by the Godunovs scheme
where n o CV  G  a set of variable parameters
which are considered to be constant. The calculations for x-t diagrams of processes for each experimental conditions with the same porosity are carried
out according to this EOS and simple equations of
the central part of the shock front in the sample earlier. The inuence of this wave on the arising ow
is not considered in this paper. To avoid the signicant systematic error the lengths of the samples are
more than twofold lower than the diameter.
The inuence of the wave of side rarefaction also
is the increasing of the curvature of shock front as
the shock wave passes along the sample. This leads
to attening the jump of SR beam intensity in the
shock front. Hence for several cases the reliable
registration of the reected shock front position can
The Hugoniots in Us  Up and P  
coordinates for different initial porosity of the samples
are shown in gs. 6 and 7 respectively. The experimetal data2 for quite similar TATB-based HE
are also shown. The differences between our and
literature data can be explained by both the different
experimental method due to systematic errors of different nature and variation of the charges manufacturing environment. The Hugoniots of samples with
porosity 2 and 8 are near the resolution limit. As
for the intermediate porosities the distinction between the 2 or 8 and their Hugoniots is not clearly
been in such experiments.
Fig. 5. Calculated and experimental x-t diagrams of
the process for different porosity.
state containing only compressive mechanical pressure for the striker and the base. The procedure of
minimization of deviations between calculated and
experimental data are used to derive the parameters
of EOS for reactants.
The pairs of parameters n o and CV  G are
bound together so they do not correspond to real
physical properties. Therefore such method of construction of the EOS does not allow one to determine the isoterm or temperature of the shock compressed reactants but the Hugoniots in Us  Up and
coordinates can be obtained.
Comparison between the calculated and the experimental x-t diagrams are shown in g. 5. The
kink point on the striker movement diagram correspons to the time when the rarefaction wave reaches
the striker-sample boundary. This wave can overtake the direct shock wave front in the sample.
However in the case of the present experimental
conditions and the relation between the striker and
sample sizes the side rarefaction wave will reach
When the shock front goes to the sample-steel
base boundary it reects back to the sample as a
shock wave. This reected wave moves along the
In the reected shock wave
front the pressure signicantly increases but according to HE desensitising the SDT process might
not the case. This make it possible to expand the
range of pressure for which we can get data for the
shock compressed reactants. For the tested samples
the pressure at the von Neumann vN spike is about
40 GP a and the maximum pressure in the reected
wave at reactants is about 25 GP a g. 8.
The sipmlied version of the Mie-Gruneisen
EOS leads to linear relationship between Us and Up
on Hugoniot. At the same time it is well known that
at low mass velocity the relation for several HE is
nonlinear. This feature can be taken into account
by complicating the form of EOS that involves increasing a number of parameters. For example the
Wescott Stewart and Davis3 model for reactants
contains 8 parameters derived from the experiment.
Fig. 6. UsUp adiabat for various porosity of initial
adiabat for various porosity of initial
these HE is about 40 GP a. The upper limit of pressure in the reactants can be observed only in the reected wave because the fast SDT process started
when the pressure in the direct wave was higher than
about 15 GP a depending on the porosity. As we
can see in the range of pressure less than 5 GP a
it is appropriate to use other methods to determine
the shock response at the present time. Widening
the range of pressure in this method to the lower
values can be reached by enlarging diameter of samples which results in reducing a curvature of a shock
front. It would lead to increasing the intensity jump
on the shock front. This will require higher intensity and energy of SR beam. Presently the active
works is carried out in this direction.
The reected waves does not always move along
the compressed sample. It is possible to choose conditions for which the expansion wave can overcome
the direct shock wave when the last one goes to
sample-base boundary. This gives data not only for
the Hugoniots of the direct and reected waves but
also for more complicated states of HE under shockA comparison of the shock initiation sensitivities and resulting reactive flow of 
several 246-trinitrotoluene-based explosives 
Dana M. Dattelbaum Stephen A. Sheffield Richard L. Gustavsen L. Lee Gibson and Carl E. Johnson 
Shock and Detonation Physics Mailstop P952 
 Detonator Technology MS P950 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 
Abstract.  246-trinitrotoluene  TNT  is  extensively  used  in  conventional  munitions 
applications  due  to  its  high  performance  low  shock  sensitivity  low  melting  point  and 
chemical stability in the molten state which allow it to be melt-cast with other explosives 
such as such as RDX 135-trinitroperhydro-135-triazine Composition B and Cyclotol 
and  HMX  octahydro-1357-tetranitro-1357-tetrazocine  Octol.    We  have  applied 
embedded  electromagnetic  gauging  techniques  to  measure  the  shock  and  reactive  flow 
associated  with  the  shock-to-detonation  transition  in  pressed  TNT  and  Composition  B 
59.5 RDX 39.5 TNT 1 wax explosive formulations.  New unreacted Hugoniot 
and  shock  sensitivity  data  on  pressed  TNT  were  found  to  be  consistent  with  historical 
reports but vacuum melt-cast Comp B was found to be more sensitive than previously 
published  Pop-plots  run-distance-to-detonation  as  a  function  of  shock  input  pressure. 
Furthermore the detonation particle velocity profiles for both explosives were measured 
at short 23 mm run distances using 1550 nm photonic Doppler velocimetry PDV at 
PMMA windowed interfaces for the first time.    
246-trinitrotoluene  TNT  has  experienced 
widespread use in munitions applications due to its 
high  detonation  performance  and  comparatively 
low  shock  sensitivity.1-25  Futhermore  its  low 
melting  temperature  and  chemical  stability  in  the 
molten phase allow TNT to be melt-cast with other 
explosives  such  as  such  as  RDX 
135trinitroperhydro-135-triazine Composition B and 
Cyclotol  and  HMX  octahydro-1357-tetranitro1357-tetrazocine Octol. Explosive formulations 
containing  TNT  may  be  prepared  by  a  variety  of 
pressing vacuum or open melt-casting or creamcasting17 
density compressibility on the principal Hugoniot 
velocity Ds and Chapman-Jouguet pressure PCJ.  
Light gas gun-driven plate impact experiments 
impart  well-defined  sustained  shock  waves  into 
explosive samples.  The input shock condition and 
evolution  in  particle  velocity  wave  profiles  as  a 
function  of  time  t  and  distance  x  into  the 
sample  allow  for  the  determination  of  an  inert 
Hugoniot  state  run-distance-to-detonation  and 
measurement of the reactive flow along the shockto-detonation  transition  in  a  single  experiment.  
Here  we  present  the  results  of  a  series  of  plate 
impact  experiments  on  melt-cast  and  pressed 
Table 1. Summary of properties of melt-cast Composition B pressed Composition B-3 and pressed TNT. 
Initial density gcm3
Detonation velocity kms
Rankine-Hugoniot fit
a by HPLC-MS. bRef. 23.  cRef. 18. dRef. 9. 
Composition  B  0    1.713  gcm3  Composition 
B-3  0    1.725  gcm3  and  TNT  pressed  0   
1.626  gcm3  providing  direct  comparisons  of  the 
unreacted  Hugoniot  locus  for  each  material  and 
shock  sensitivities  Pop-plots  to  earlier  reports.  
The  plate  impact  experiments  were  performed 
using  embedded  electromagnetic  gauges  as  the 
principal  diagnostic  to  obtain  particle  velocity 
wave  profiles  at  up  to  10  positions  in-material 
providing  the  first  measurements  of  this  kind  on 
TNT-based  explosives.  In  addition  detonation 
particle  velocity  profiles  were  measured  at 
intefaces  using  1550  nm 
photonic  Doppler  velocimetry  PDV  following  a 
short  run  distance. 
  The  shock  sensitivity 
unreacted  EOS  and  detonation  reaction  zone 
dynamics  for  pressed  TNT  were  found  to  be 
consistent  with  earlier  reports  but  the    vacuum 
melt-cast Comp B was found to be more sensitive 
than earlier reports. 
Table  1  summarizes  the  properties  of  the 
TNT-based  explosives  investigated  in  this  study.  
A vacuum melt-cast Composition B billet 300 mm 
diameter  57 mm thick was machined into 1.7 
electromagnetic gauging experiments. The original 
lot information is not known but the samples were 
melt cast at LANL in the mid-1980s into booster 
pads and had a part designation of 47898-02-007. 
The Comp B consisted of nominally 59.5 RDX 
58.3    1.1  39.5  TNT  and  1  wax  by 
weight.  The RDX was found to be contaminated 
with  5.9  HMX  by  HPLC-MS.  The  average 
density was 0  1.713 0.004 gcm3. 
Composition  B-3  samples  60  RDX  40 
TNT  no  wax  were  hot  pressed  70oC  under 
vacuum and samples for plate impact experiments 
were  machined  from  the  pressed  billets.    The 
average  density  was  1.725    0.004  gcm3.    The 
Comp B-3 was Holston lot HOL85G461-004.  The 
Comp  B-3  contained  6.53  HMX  as  determined 
by  HPLC-MS  Table  1.  A  scanning  electron 
micrograph  of  the  Comp  B-3  RDX  particles 
following a toluene-etch of the TNT indicated that 
the average RDX particle size is 100 m Fig. 1. 
TNT  was  also  hot  pressed  under  vacuum  to 
produce beige-to-golden colored solid billets from 
which  1.7  diameter  wedge  samples  were 
machined  for  shock  initiation  experiments.    The 
average density of the samples was 1.626  0.004 
electron  micrograph  of 
Composition  B-3  following  toluene-etch  of  the 
TNT. The average RDX particle size is 100 m. 
Embedded electromagnetic gauge experiments 
Microsecond-duration sustained shock waves 
were introduced into Comp B samples by gas gundriven  plate  impact  using  a  50  mm  bore  launch 
light  gas  gun  described 
previously26-28  which  may  obtain  projectile 
velocities  of  up  to  3.6  kms.    The  principal 
diagnostic  in  the  experiments  was  embedded 
electromagnetic  gauging  which  allows 
measurement of particle velocity wave profiles at 
up  to  10  Lagrangian  positions  in  the  sample 
including at the impact interface.28-29 
Fig. 2.  A Photograph of the LANL embedded electromagnetic gauge package. B A single stirrup gauge element 
is affixed at the impact face of the target to obtain the shock input condition.  C In the full target assembly the 
embedded gauge package is inserted on a 30o angle.  A PMMA window was mounted at the rear surface of the 
explosive wedge sample in this case annotated Comp-B 22-23 mm from the impact face to obtain a short rundistance detonation profile using PDV. 
Figure 2A shows the details of the embedded 
gauge  package  which  consists  of  5  m  patterned 
Al  foil  gauge  elements  sandwiched  between  two 
25  m  films  of  FEP-PTFE  forming  a  membrane 
60 m thick.  In the gauge package there are 9 
particle  velocity  gauges  which  are  the  horizontal 
elements  indicated  in  the  figure.  The  particle 
velocity  gauges  in  concert  with  a  stirrup  gauge 
element  at  the  impact  interface  Figure 2B  allow 
for measurement of particle velocity wave profiles 
at up to 10 positions in-material.  In addition there 
are  3  shock  trackers  providing  closely-spaced 
gauge  elements  for  higher  temporal  resolution 
redundant  measurements  of  the  shock  velocity.   
The final target geometry is shown in Figure 2C.  
The  embedded  gauge  membrane  is  inserted  into 
the wedge sample at a 30o angle which spaces the 
gauges  0.8 mm apart from the impact face.  At 
the back interface of the target approximately 2223 mm from the impact face an 8 k Al mirror 
was coated to a PMMA window and affixed to the 
explosive sample for measurement of a short rundistance  detonation  profile  using  1550  nm 
photonic  Doppler  velocimetry 
Photonics part 1CL15P020LC-C01. 
Front surface impact experiments 
Three  front  surface  impact  experiments  were 
to  obtain  high  pressure  unreacted 
Hugoniot states and reaction rates in Composition 
B-3.    Composition  B-3  samples  0    1.725   
0.004 gcm3 were mounted in the front of Lexan 
polycarbonate  projectiles  and 
oriented  100  single  crystal  LiF  REFLEX 
Analytical  Corp.  0    2.638  gcm3  windows 
using  the  same  two-stage  light gas  gun  described 
above.  Dual  velocity-per-fringe  vpf  VISARs31 
Inc.  Albuquerque  NM.  
Shocked  states  in  the  Comp  B-3  samples  were 
determined by impedance matching to the known 
LiF Hugoniot 0  2.638 gcm3 c0  5.15 mms 
s    1.35  using  the  measured  projectile  velocity 
upr  and  the  interface  particle  velocity  uint  from 
the  VISAR  measurements.    Substitution  into  the 
Rankine-Hugoniot  relation  for  conservation  of 
Interferometry  System 
Unreacted  Hugoniot  data  summarized 
Tables 2 and 3 for vacuum melt-cast Comp B and 
pressed  Comp  B-3  are  plotted  in  the  pressureparticle  velocity  P-up  plane  in  Figure  3  along 
with  experimental  data  reported  by  Marsh20  and 
Lemar  et  al.19  and 
linear  Rankine-Hugoniot 
relationships  Us    c0    sup  by  Coleburn  and 
Liddiard18  Comp  B-3  and  Urtiew  et  al.23-25  A 
linear  Rankine-Hugoniot  fit  to  the  new  Hugoniot 
data for Comp B in the Us-up plane to 8.4 GPa is 
Us  2.41  0.27  2.30  0.36up.  As seen in 
the  figure  there  is  qualitative  agreement  of  the 
new  unreacted  Hugoniot  states  for  Comp  B  with 
those  reported  by  Ref.  18  and  19  but  softer 
behavior  than  in  Ref.  20  due  to  a  lesser  RDX 
content  in  the  material  studied  here.    Similar  to 
other  explosives  an  increase  in  data  scatter  is 
observed  as  the  input  shock pressure  is  increased 
into the initiation regime.   The Comp B Hugoniot 
data overlaps wholly with that reported previously 
and extends to just 8.4 GPa. In a single experiment 
1s-1563 a quasi-elastic limit was measured upel 
 0.029 mms Usel  3.185 mms PHEL  0.16 
GPa and a low pressure Hugoniot state below up  
based  on  the  LiF  Hugoniot  parameters  and  uint 
yields  an  expression  for pressure  at  the  interface 
which must be the same in both LiF and the Comp 
PintCompB  PintCompB  P  0LiFc0LiF  sLiFuintuint  3 
The  particle  velocity  in  the  Comp  B-3  is  the 
difference in those measured for the projectile and 
umat  upr  uint .   
Shock  velocity  in  the  Comp  B-3  was  then 
calculated using a second application of Eq. 1 and 
the measured initial sample density  
Plate  impact  experiments  were  performed  to 
1  obtain  new  unreacted  Hugoniot  and  shock 
sensitivity Pop-plot data on Comp B Comp B-3 
and  pressed  TNT  explosive  formulations  and  2 
detonation wave profiles for the TNT explosives at 
summarize  the  new  unreacted  Hugoniot  data 
initiation  experiments  and  detonation 
particle velocity profiles for the three explosives. 
Unreacted Equation of State 
Table  2  summarizes  new  unreacted  Hugoniot 
states obtained for Comp B and pressed TNT using 
embedded  electromagnetic  gauging  in  the  shockto-detonation  initiation  experiments.    Table  3 
summarizes unreacted Hugoniot data obtained for 
Comp  B-3  from  the  front  surface  impact  reverse 
ballistic experiments.  
Comp B and Comp B-3 
Fig. 3. Unreacted Hugoniot data for Comp B and 
Comp  B-3  in  the  pressure-particle  velocity  plane 
from this study32 Marsh20 and Lemar et al.19 Also 
linear  Rankine-Hugoniot 
relationships  from  this  study32  Coleburn  and 
Liddiard18 and Urtiew et al.23-24   
there is an induction time of  30 ns followed by a 
390  ns  rise  in  particle  velocity  associated  with 
reactive  growth  in  the  Comp  B-3  to  a  final  up   
0.954    0.008  kms.    The  reaction  timescales  for 
the  other  2  reverse  ballistic  experiments  are  also 
listed in Table 3.  
Unreacted  Hugoniot  data  for  pressed  TNT 
obtained from the embedded gauging experiments 
is  also  summarized  in  Table  2.    The  data  add  to 
historical  data  on  pressed  and  cast  TNT  from 
earlier  reports.4-16  Figure  5  shows  the  newly 
measured  Hugoniot  states  for  pressed  TNT  gray 
squares overlaid with extensive literature data on 
cast  creamed  cast  and  pressed  TNT  in  the  Us-up 
plane.    A  linear  Rankine-Hugoniot  fit  to  the  new 
data  gives Us   2.730.13    1.910.12up.     This 
can be compared with Coleburn and Liddiards fit 
of  Us    2.0500.034    2.3900.032up  for  cast 
TNT  0      1.614  gcm318  and  Wasley  and 
Walkers  Us  2.42  2.23up for pressed TNT.15  
The measured bulk sound velocity for TNT of cb  
2.297 kms shown in the figure is overestimated 
linear  Rankine-Hugoniot  fits 
consistent  with  other  explosives 
Figure 5. Compilation of unreacted Hugoniot data 
for different types of TNT explosives shown in the 
shock  velocity-particle  velocity  plane.    The  new 
data  are  shown  by  the  grey  square  symbols.    A 
linear  Rankine-Hugoniot  fit  to  the  new  pressed 
TNT data gives Us  2.730.13  1.910.12up.   
the  unreacted  Hugoniot 
Composition  B  formulations  3  reverse  ballistic 
experiments were performed impacting Comp B-3 
into  oriented  100  single  crystal  LiF  windows.  
Dual  VISARs  measured  the  interface  particle 
velocity  wave  profile  at 
interface.  An example profile from shot 2s-760 is 
shown in Figure 4.   
Figure 4.  Particle velocity wave profile measured 
at the Comp B-3LiF interface in shot 2s-760.  The 
impact  velocity  was  1.740    0.001  kms  which 
imparts Pin  9.5 GPa in the Comp B-3 sample.  At 
this  condition  there  is  an  induction  time  of    30 
ns followed by a 390 ns rise in particle velocity to 
a final up  0.954  0.008 kms.  
The  sharp  shock  rise  is  observed  at  the 
interface  followed  by  a  plateau 
velocity.    The  particle  velocity  plateau  was  used 
in  concert  with  the  measured  projectile  velocity 
experiments  extended  the  shock  input  pressures 
from 9.4 to 12.5 GPa.  Inspection of Figure shows 
that the hot pressed Comp B-3 is most similar to 
Coleburn and Liddiards linear Rankine-Hugoniot 
behavior18 also for Comp B-3 extended to higher 
shock  pressures.  These  data  are  useful  for 
extending  the  unreacted  EOS  for  extrapolation  to 
von Neumann vN spike conditions for estimating 
reaction  zone  dynamics  and  modeling  of 
detonation  reaction  rates.  From  the  increase  in 
particle  velocity  at  the  explosiveLiF  interface 
reaction  induction  times  and  reaction  rates  may 
also  be  discerned.    For  example  in  shot  2s-760 
Table 2. Summary of unreacted Hugoniot states and run-distancestimes-to-detonation for vacuum meltcast Composition B 0  1.713  0.004 gcm3 and pressed TNT 0  1.626  0.004 gcm3 as a function 
of  shock  input  stress  GPa.  Also  given  are  the  early-time  detonation  velocities  measured  in  the 
aDetonation velocities are the average values measured using 3 shock tracker elements in each experiment expect for 
those annotated which were obtained using a single shock tracker. 
Shock initiation sensitivity 
Shock  initiation  experiments  were  performed 
on  melt-cast  Comp  B  and  pressed  TNT  using 
embedded  electromagnetic  gauges 
measurements of particle velocity wave profiles at 
up  to  10  Lagrangian  positions.  As  heterogeneous 
pressedcast explosives Comp B and TNT initiate 
via a hot spot-derived mechanism characterized by 
reactive  growth  in  and  behind  the  shock  front.  
Measured  run-distances  and  times-to-detonation 
are summarized in Table 2.   
Shock  initiation  experiments  were  performed 
Comp B at shock input pressures ranging from 4.3 
 8.4 GPa.  Example profiles from Shot 2s-708 are 
shown  in  Fig.  6  illustrating  the  reactive  flow 
associated with the shock-to-detonation with Pin  
7.2 GPa resulting in a turnover to detonation at xD 
  3.9    0.1  mm  tD    0.80    0.02  s.  Reactive 
growth  is  observed  close  to  the  shock  front 
consistent  with  a  hot  spot-driven  heterogeneous 
initiation mechanism.   Electrical noise is detected 
on  the  embedded  gauges  which  is  believed  to  be 
due to piezoelectric effects in the RDX.  Comp B 
initiates  via  a  heterogenous  initiation  mechanism 
in which there is a continual increase in the shock 
and  particle  velocities  in  the  front  leading  to 
detonation.  Also  notable  is  the  large  increase  in 
particle  velocity  from  the  unreacted  shock  input 
condition  to  the  von  Neumann  condition  at  the 
front of the detonation wave. Following turnover 
the  detonation  is  nearly  steady  similar  to  other 
heterogeneous  explosives  and 
detonation  velocities  are  consistent  with 
reported  steady  detonation  velocity  Ds    7.92 
kms.23 From the embedded gauge records the run 
distance and time to detonation were determined to 
 5.  The Pop-plot for vacuum melt Comp B is 
overlaid  with  that  of  Comp  B-3  from  Ramsay27 
and Urtiew23-24 for a lower density formulation in 
Fig. 7.  The vacuum-melt Comp B was found to be 
more  sensitive  than  previous  reports  with  run 
distance  being  shorter  by  5  mm  at  some  input 
lags the initial shock wave in space and time.  The 
shock  sensitivity  of  pressed  TNT  studied  here  is 
found to be similar to that reported in Ref. 21 at Pin 
  6-10  GPa  but  more  sensitive  at  higher  shock 
Figure 7. Pop-plot for vacuum melt-cast Comp B 
overlaid with data from Urtiew et al.23-25 for open 
melt cast Comp B and Ramsay and Popalato.21 
There  is  a noticeable  scatter  in  Pop-plot data 
for  TNT  which  is  greater  than  that  observed  in 
Comp  B  and  plastic-bonded  explosives  such  as 
PBX  9501  and  PBX  9502  despite  the  quality  of 
the  measured  wave  profiles.    It  is  unknown  what 
the origin of the scatter is however TNT is known  
Figure 6. Particle velocity wave profiles from shot 
2s-708 of Comp B with Pin  7.2 GPa resulting in 
a turnover to detonation at xD  3.9  0.1 mm tD  
New  Pop-plot  data  for  pressed  TNT 
summarized  in  Table  2  and  plotted  in  Figure  8.  
By comparison to Comp B the reactive growth in 
TNT is delayed relative to the shock front.  Figure 
9A shows wave profiles associated with the shockto-detonation transition in pressed TNT from shot 
2s-584  with  Pin      6.8    0.1  GPa.    At  this  input 
condition  xD    5.6    0.2  mm  and  tD      1.24    
0.04 s. Figure 9B shows the response of 3 shock 
trackers in the same experiment. There are marked 
similarities  between  pressed  TNT  and  plasticbonded explosives such as PBX 9501 in which the 
peak particle velocity associated with reactive burn 
Figure 8. Pop-plot data for pressed TNT from this 
study  overlaid  with  that  from  pressed  and  cast 
TNT from References 21 and 1.  The blue line is 
consistency with earlier work at Pin  6-10 GPa. 
NeumannDoering ZND 1-dimensional theory of 
detonation.33-34  Detonation 
profiles  are  commonly  measured  using  optical 
velocimetry  at  a  windowed  interface.    Here  we 
have  measured  particle  velocity  wave  profiles  in 
detonation  at  a  rear  PMMA  windowed  interface 
23  mm  from  the  impact  face.  The  profiles  are 
early-time  detonation  profiles  following  turnover 
and  may  not  be  steady  at  this  run  distance.  
However they are illustrative of the differences in 
reactive  flow  and  reaction  zone  dynamics  in  the 
two  explosives.    Furthermore  they  are  the  first 
measurements  of  detonation  profiles  using  1550 
nm PDV for TNT and Comp B that we are aware 
of.  Figure 10 shows the detonation profiles from 
shots  2s-685  and  2s-583  respectively.  Two 
measurements  from  2s-685  are  overlaid  in  the 
Figure and the profiles have been off-set in time 
Sheffield  et  al.  Ref.  4  measured 
detonation  profile  of  pressed  TNT  using  ORVIS 
velocimetry  at  a  H2O  window  and  estimated  vN 
and  CJ  conditions  of  27.5  and  22  GPa 
respectively with an estimated reaction zone of  
80  ns  or  0.55  mm.4    More  recently  Kury  et  al. 
measured the detonation profile of pressed TNT at 
LiF  and  lowered  the  estimate  of  CJ  to  19  GPa 
based  on  measured  profiles  and  reaction  rate 
modeling using an Ignition and Growth model.8  In 
our measurements at PMMA we measure a peak 
uvN    2.835  mms.    Using  the  linear  Us-up 
Figure 9. Particle velocity wave profiles associated 
with  the  shock-to-detonation  transition  in  pressed 
TNT from shot 2s-584 with Pin   6.8  0.1 GPa.  
At this input condition xD  5.6  0.4 mm and tD 
to  be  a  low-melting  explosive  and  it  is  possible 
that  shock  driven  or  hot  spot-mediated  local 
melting  has  a  role  in  the  shock-to-detonation 
Reaction zone dynamics 
detonating  explosives  is  defined  by  the  leading 
inert shock front which compresses the explosive 
to  the  von  Neumann  vN  spike  condition  on  the 
unreacted Hugoniot and the Chapman-Jouget CJ 
Table 3. Summary of front surface impact experiment of Comp B-3 into oriented 100 LiF.  uint is the 
measured  interface  particle  velocity  which  is  used  with  the  measured  projectile  velocity  and  initial 
density to determine unreacted Hugoniot states by impedance matching.  
a Us is the shock velocity P is the shock pressure and V is the specific volume of Comp B-3 at each unreacted 
Hugoniot state. bThe final up is the final peak interface velocity at LiF. ctind and trise are the measured delay and rise 
times associated with the particle velocity increase and are indicative of chemical reaction induction and progress 
relationship  for  TNT  reported  by  Ref.  1818 
JWL  products  EOS836  and  D  6.93  kms  we 
predict  uvN    2.49  mms  at  PMMA  which  is 
lower than the measured value and indicative of an 
unreacted EOS that is too stiff.  The predicted CJ 
condition  at  PMMA  is  up    2.13  mms.    We 
observe  a  fast  decay  over  80  ns  to  up    2.34 
mms  consistent  with  Sheffield  and  Kury48 
followed  by  a  slower  decay  to  up    2.13  mms 
over 200 ns. Similar to H2O a rarefaction wave is 
propagated  into  the  partially  reacted  detonation 
products  at  the  PMMATNT  interface  which 
slows the reaction rate.  
The detonation profile for Comp B measured 
at  PMMA  has  a  much  greater  peak  interface 
particle velocity up  3.269 mms compared with 
TNT  Fig.  10  due  to  its  higher  performance 
characteristics.    The  measured  uvN  is  in  excellent 
agreement  with  the  predicted  value  of  uvN    3.27 
mms  in-material  PvN    38.8  GPa  obtained 
using  the  unreacted  Hugoniot  from  Ref.  18  and 
product  EOS  from  Dobratz.2  Using  the  unreacted 
and  products  EOS  we  measure  a  chemical 
reaction  zone  length  of    50  ns  or    0.40  mm.  
The measured profiles were also noticeably noisier 
than those from TNT or in PBX 950235 by PDV. 
summary  we  have  presented  new 
unreacted  Hugoniot 
detonation reaction zone measurements for Comp 
B Comp B-3 and pressed TNT explosives.  The 
results  for  pressed  TNT  are  in  agreement  with 
extensive literature data on this explosive and we 
present  the  first  detonation  profile  measured  at  a 
PMMA window using 1550 nm PDV.   
The detonation wave characteristics at PMMA 
were  found  to  be  similar  to  those  measured  at  a 
H2O window by Sheffield et al.48  Experiments on 
Comp B and Comp B-3 add to and extend limited 
data sets on these explosives. The shock sensitivity 
of  vacuum  melt-cast  Comp  B  was  found  to  be 
greater than previously indicated.  We also provide 
reaction  rate  information  for  Comp  B-3  between 
Figure 10.  Measured detonation wave profiles for 
pressed  TNT  and  Comp  B  following  turnover  to 
detonation using 1550 nm PDV. 
A Mechanism to Quench Detonation in Composite Solid Explosive 
Dynamic Science Inc. Phoenix AZ 
under contract to U.S. Army Research Laboratory APG MD 21005 
Abstract.  Campbell    Travis  8th  IDS  reported  results  from  an  intriguing  experiment 
that initiated detonation from the top edge of a super-critical slab of explosive immersed 
in water.  This detonation collided head-on with a weak shock wave originating from the 
bottom  end  of  the  slab.    Detonation  continued  propagating  into  material  altered  by  the 
weak  shock  and  then  abruptly  extinguished.      The  quenching  mechanism  has  been 
debated ever since.   Twenty years prior Liddiard 4th IDS reported results from a waterfilled  aquarium  containing  a  spherical  donor  charge  surrounded  by  thin  cylindrical 
explosive samples positioned at various radii to adjust shock input pressure.  Images from 
a high-speed camera allowed determination of a threshold-for-burning as a function of 
pressure.  In this Ref. Liddiard provides the time interval between shock impingement 
and onset of combustion.   The current work has found that this time interval as a function 
of  pressure  forms  a  lower  bound  early  time  for  the  Pop  Plot  data  implying  that  this 
combustion  event  continues  to  operate  on  the  same  time  scale  as  the  transition  to 
detonation.    A  possible  quenching  mechanism  occurs  when  a  running  detonation 
encounters shocked material that has exceeded the threshold for combustion.  Based on 
this concept an analysis of wave interaction is developed with timing dictated solely by 
Liddiards data the predicted run-length after a detonation collides with a 1.33 GPa shock 
wave is close to Campbells observation for PBX9404 at 1.84 gcc.  
Desensitization of solid composite explosives 
has  been  observed  by  many  investigators1-6  but 
mostly  from  the  standpoint  of  a  precursor  shock 
wave making it more difficult to shock-initiate the 
explosive.    A commonly accepted explanation is 
based  on  the  concept748-11  of  dead  pressing 
is  accompanied  by  a  pressure  range.  
Precursor  shock  waves  with  pressure  amplitude 
below  the  lower  limit  are  too  weak  to  alter  the 
explosive  material  which  then  retains  its  shock 
sensitivity.    Pressure  amplitudes  above  the  upper 
limit  will  promptly 
However  shock  waves  with  pressure  amplitude 
within  the  given  range  are  capable  of  collapsing 
some or most of the poresvoids which reduces the 
population  of  available  hot-spots.    However  hotspot formation and continued combustion is a ratedependent  process  competing  with  transient  heat 
loss  to  determine  failure  or  success  of  initiation.  
Possibly the crucial factor controlling the outcome 
dead explosive or reacting material is the profile 
shapeduration of this precursor shock wave. 
     A  detonation  propagating  in  material  with 
super-critical  geometry  is  normally  difficult  to 
stop.  Some exceptions involve strong divergence 
of the wave such as in corner turning12.  At the 8th 
IDS Campbell  Travis4 reported results from an 
insightful  and  intriguing  experiment  see  Fig.  1 
that  initiated  detonation  from  the  top  edge  of  a 
super-critical  slab  of  explosive  PBX-9404  and 
COMPB-3  immersed  in  water.    This  detonation 
collided  head-on  with  a  weak  shock  wave 
originating  from  the  bottom  end  of  the  slab.  
Following  the  collision  the  detonation  continued 
propagating  into  material  altered  by  the  weak 
shock -- and then abruptly extinguished. The deadpressing  concept  has  been  invoked489  to  explain 
how  a  running  detonation  might  quench  when 
encountering  a  region  of  compressed  and  hence 
Fig. 1.  Schematic of Campbell  Travis4 experiment.  Explosive slab attached to 25mm-thick PMMA slab 
and immersed in water.  Slab initiated by detonator from top. Sphere of PBX-9205 creates precursor shock 
wave propagating up from bottom of slab.  After collision detonation continues propagating  then 
suddenly quenches.  Schematic from P.C. Souers LLNL HEreference website 
Fig. 2.  Schematic of Liddiards 13 aquarium experiment.  Donor explosive is 82-mm diameter cast 
Pentolite.  Sample  explosives 50.8mm diameter 12.7mm thick positioned at various radii from donor.  
Observations made with Jacobs framing camera. 
disintegration  of  the  sample.    In  this  work13  and 
continuedfurther  aquarium 
energetic  materials14-16  the  primary  focus  was 
identifying the range of shock pressure amplitude 
that leads to reaction in the given material.   
In  the  initial  reference  however  Liddiard13  also 
the  onset  of  combustion.   
Plotting  the  values  of  this  time  interval  for  the 
explosive PBX-9404 1.84 gcc as a function of 
the impinging shock pressure shows some scatter.  
However  ignoring  the  two  lowest  pressure  data 
points allows the linear log-log fit shown in Fig. 3 
Liddiard Data PBX-9404  1.84 gcc
LSQ-fit LogP  0.62487 - 0.52466logt
Twenty  years  prior  to  the  Campbell    Travis 
work  Liddiard13  investigated  the  response  of 
various explosives to low-level shock waves over 
a  range  of  amplitudes.    A  shock  wave  was 
generated  by  a  spherical  donor  charge  centrally 
located  within  a  water-filled  aquarium  and 
explosive samples were positioned at various radii 
from  the  donor  as  a  means  to  control  the  shock 
wave amplitude seen by each sample.  A framing 
camera  recorded  the  arrival  of  the  donor  shock 
wave and the subsequent response of each sample.  
The  objective  was  to  find  the  threshold-forburning which was determined from the image on 
the camera record when the size of the explosive 
sample began to increase.   Note that this is not an 
ignition  threshold  it  is  the  onset  of  combustion 
Fig. 3.   PBX-9404 1.84 gcc.  Liddiards 13 time-to-combustion data vs. shock wave pressure. 
Least-square fit to data represented by solid symbols. 
Some  context  for  this  fitted  curve  logP   
0.62487    0.52466logt  is  provided  by  adding 
the  LANL  POP-plot  data17  for  PBX9404    1.84 
gcc  in  the  form  of  time-to-detonation  versus 
initial shock pressure as shown in Fig. 4. 
 Interestingly  the  curve  derived  from  Liddiards 
data  for  time-to-combustion  forms  a  lower 
bound early time for shock initiation POP-plot 
mechanism  controlling  onset  of  combustion 
remains active and must precede shock initiation. 
Liddiard Data PBX9404  1.84 gcc
LASL POP-plot Data PBX9404  1.84 gcc Gibbs
Fig. 4.   PBX-9404 1.84 gcc.  Liddiards 13 time-to-combustion data plotted with LANL POP-Plot data 
17.  Least-square-fit of Liddiard data forms lower bound early time for POP-Plot data. 
The connection between combustion and onset of 
detonation exhibited in Fig. 4 suggests a possible 
application to the Campbell  Travis experiment.  
For  PBX9404  Ref.  4  reports  an  example  where 
the  downward-propagating  detonation  collides 
with  an  upward-propagating  shock  wave  at  a 
strength  of  1.33  GPa. 
detonation continues propagating through the preshocked  explosive  for  19.6  mm  and  abruptly 
the  detonation  would  attempt 
quenches.    Is  it  possible  that  the  detonation  has 
traveled through the pre-shocked explosive to the 
location  where  combustion  has  begun?    If  this 
propagate into a disintegrating material containing 
bearings.  The normal detonation self-propagation 
mechanism  involving  high  strain  rates  and  a 
highly-localized  transverse  wave  structure  would 
Fig. 5.  X-T Schematic of forward-propagating precursor shock wave colliding with rearward-propagating 
detonation.  Fig. a shows locus of distance xc behind precursor shock wave for onset-of-combustion.  
After collision detonation is assumed to propagate at Vdet.  Fig. b shows relationships to compute xdet 
after collision is not required.   xdet    Vdet is distance traveled by detonation before encountering 
from known information behind precursor shock wave before collision description of altered flow field  
onset of combustion quenching point. 
From the fit to Liddiards data shown in Figs. 3  
4 a shock wave in PBX9404 1.84 gcc with a 
pressure  of  1.33  GPa  would  require  a  time-tocombustion tc  of 9 s see dash line in Fig. 3.  
Assuming the standard Hugoniot18 of Vs  2.494  
2.093u  a simple computation indicates a shock 
velocity  of  3.04  kms  and  a  particle  velocity  of 
0.263  kms.    Then  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  5a  the 
distance  behind  the  shock  where  combustion 
xc  Vs  utc   3.04  0.2639.0  25 mm 
After collision with the weak shock wave assume 
the detonation velocity Vdet remains at 8.8 kms.  
Then the time for detonation to arrive at material 
which has achieved the onset of combustion is 
xdet   Vdet  xc  Vdet  Vs  Vdet 
 25mm  0.743  18.6 mm. 
Thus  the  distance  traveled  by  the  detonation 
beyond the collision point is 
the  pre-shock  pressure 
This is remarkably close to the value of 19.6 mm 
reported by Campbell  Travis.  Although Ref. 4 
additional  runs  no  other  values  are  given  for  the 
distance  traveled  by  the  detonation  beyond  the 
collision point.  All recent attempts to locate these 
values  were  unsuccessful.  Note 
correlation4  developed  for  time  required  for 
complete  activation  of  all  hot  spots  was  never 
used  in  the  present  calculation.    It  should  be 
emphasized  that  the  timing  of  the  combustion 
response observed by Liddiard is valid only for the 
water-confinement  of  his  experiment.    Repeating 
this  experiment  in  air  would  give  a  different 
correlation  and  possibly  no  combustion  event  at 
all.    By  the  same  token  the  Campbell    Travis 
experiment  repeated  in  air  might  also  give  an 
entirely different result. 
The current investigation proposes a mechanism to 
quench detonation based solely on Liddiards data 
for  time-to-combustion.    Based  on  Liddiards 
observations combustion begins a certain distance 
behind  a  weak-level  desensitizing  shock  wave 
within a certain pressure range.  Once  detonation 
collides with an opposing weak-level shock wave 
propagation continues in the compressed explosive 
until it encounters the onset of combustion -- and 
then detonation fails.    Shock Compressibility Of Low-Sensitive He Of Different Initial Porosity
Ewgeny.B. Smirnov Alexander.N. Averin Boris.G. Loboiko Oleg.V. Kostitsyn Yuriy.A. Belenovsky 
Alexander.V. Lebedev Victor.N. Scherbakov Kirill.M. Prosvirnin Alexander.N. Kiselev Konstantin.V. 
Eganov Vasily.M. Volkov Vitaly.V. Kozel 
Russian Federal Nuclear Center  All-Russian Research Institute for Technical Physics named after 
Academician E.I. Zababakhin Snezhinsk Russia. 
 ewgenysmirnovmail.ru 
arameters of shock wave in low sensitive HE were registered simultaneously by piezo 
resistive and radio interferometric methods. Loading of HE with various initial porosity 
was performed with the help of explosion shock wave generator. Piezo resistive gauges 
registered  pressure  of  shock  wave  which  enters  the  charge  out  of  HE  under  study. 
Detailed tracking the trajectory of shock wave with an error of several percents permits 
to  determine  the  initial  velocity  of  shock  wave  which  enters  the  HE  under  study  and 
together with the data on pressure measured by piezo resistive method to determine points 
on Hugoniot of unreactive HE with various initial porosity. 
Shock  compressibility  of  explosives  HE  is 
conventionally  analyzed  by  the  optical  lever 
technique  in  experiments  with  wedge  samples  or 
with  multichannel  electromagnetic  analyzers  of 
wave and mass velocity 1-4. 
In  our  research  shock  wave  parameters  in  a 
simultaneously  by  piezoresistive  and 
interferometric  techniques  5  7.  Experimental 
setup is presented in figure 1. The explosive to be 
analyzed was loaded with shock waves of different 
intensity  with  the  help  of  an  explosive  generator 
consisting of the plane-wave lens the HMX-based 
charge 30 mm thick and the attenuating barrier of 
ftoroplast.  Diameter  of  the  loader  was  120  mm. 
The  shock-wave  generator  was  calibrated 
preliminary experiments 5-7. The loader allowed 
the shock waves with the amplitude 6 to 30 GPa to 
be created in HE due to changes in the thickness of 
the  fluoroplastic  attenuating  barrier.  Porosity  of 
HE parts was 1 2 3 and 4. Thickness of 
the HE charge was 30 mm. The experiments were 
All  the  investigations  were  conducted  with 
cylindrical  charges  120  mm  in  diameter.  During 
the  experiments  piezoresistive  gauges  recorded 
both parameters of the shock wave entering the HE 
shockdetonation  wave.  Figure  2  displays  the 
results of one of the experiments. 
and  parameters  of 
signal  was  applied  to  the  experimental  assembly 
via the waveguide Fig. 1. 
The -t diagrams of the initiation process were 
radiointerferograms  these  diagrams  present  a  curve 
kinked in the detonation onset point.  Generalized 
the  shock-todetonation  wave  transition  in  HE  of  4  and  2 
porosity  is  presented  in  figures  5  and  6.  The  X- 
and Y- axes display time t and thickness H of the 
attenuating  barrier  and  the  Z-axis  displays  space 
the  x-t  diagrams  of 
The  pressure  profiles  obtained 
experiment were approximated by the expression 
where  t0    time  of  shock  wave  arrival  to  the 
gauge   wave-front rise time A0 A1 A2  A3  
P002332 GPa    zero  coefficient  of  calibration 
relationship  8  between  pressure  P  and  relative 
variation in manganin gauge resistance RR0. The 
approximation  results  are  presented  in  figure  3 
with a blue line. Pressure at the shock wave front 
was determined by the expression 
The  shock  wave  pressure  values  obtained  in 
this way were subsequently applied to construct a 
Hugoniot  of  low-sensitive  HE  having  different 
initial  porosity.  The  pressure  profiles  of  the 
entering  shock  wave  for  HE  of  4  and  2 
porosity are displayed in figures 3 and 4. The X- 
and Y- axes display time t and thickness H of the 
attenuating barrier and Z-axis displays pressure P. 
Along  with  the  piezoresistive  technique  the 
radiowave  technique  was  also  used  to  investigate 
the  initiation  process  9  10.  The  interferometer 
was  used  to  record  the  x-t  diagram  of  shock-todetonation  wave  transition  in  HE  charges.  Radio 
Jeeves  algorithm  12.  In  order 
convergence  the  algorithm  was  modified  by  the 
heavy  ball  method 
approximation  by  equations  3  and  4  are 
displayed  in  Fig. 7.  And  figure  8  gives  the 
differentiation  of  the  approximative  function  xt. 
Approximation  error  of  3  and  4  for  all  HE 
porosity levels 1 - 4 is no more than 50 m. 
The  approach  proposed  in  11  was  used  for 
the  detailed  description  of  the  experimental  data 
during  the  entire  process  of  HE  shock-wave 
loading.  According 
experimental  data  were  approximated  by  solution 
of the differential equation of second order 
where US0  initial velocity of shock wave a  
acceleration functions of the form 
where D  detonation velocity am  maximum 
acceleration  Um    shock  wave  velocity  that 
ensures maximum acceleration. 
Solution of equations 3 and 4 was brought into 
the  experimental  data  by 
deviation  squares  minimization  using  the  Hooke
m
Detailed  tracking  of  the  shock  wave  path 
enables  the  initial  velocity  of  the  shock  wave 
entering  the  test  HE  to  be  determined  with  the 
1  accuracy  and  in  combination  with  the 
pressure data  to find the points on the Hugoniot 
of  the  nonreacting  HE  having  different  initial 
porosity.  Figure  9  presents  data  on  shock 
compressibility we obtained for explosives of 1 SDT Characteristics of a HNIW-Based Explosive
Jaimin Lee Eulha Hwang Sung Hyun Baek Jung-Su Park and Kieun Lee
High Energy-Density Technologies Directorate
Agency for Defense Development Daejeon Republic of Korea
Abstract. To investigate shock-to-detonation transition SDT characteristics of a HNIW
or CL-20-based test explosive a rate law based on the Forest Fire model was calibrated. 
Five wedge  tests  were  conducted while  varying  the initial shock  pressure  entering the 
wedge-shaped test explosive charges from 5 to 11 GPa. In each test the shock trajectory
along the inclined surface of the wedge explosive was recorded by using a streak camera.
The streak records showed that relatively sharp SDT occurs in the test explosive.
The shock  Hugoniot  of  the  test  explosive  was  obtained  based  on the  free-surface 
velocity of the attenuators from VISAR measurements and the early shock velocity in the 
wedges  determined  from  the  streak  records.  The  shock  trajectories  coincided  very  well 
when  shifted  corresponding to  the  transition  points  which  verified  the single-curve 
buildup hypothesis. The run distances to detonation and consequently the Pop plot for 
the test explosive were determined from the recorded shock trajectories. The Pop plot was 
located between those of Comp. B and PBX-9404 implying that the test explosive should 
be more sensitive to shock than Comp. B and less sensitive than PBX-9404.
The Forest Fire rate of the test explosive was calibrated from the experimental Pop 
plot. The wedge tests were numerically modeled with the calibrated rate by using a onedimensional  Lagrangian  hydrodynamic  code.  The  calculated  shock  trajectories  agreed 
very well with experimental observations.
Understanding  of  the  shock  sensitivity  of  an 
explosive  is  of  great  importance  in  assessing  its 
to  accidental  mechanical 
the  capability  of 
controlling  performance  of  the  explosive  in  many 
applications.  There  are  many  experimental 
methods  devised  to  evaluate  the  shock  sensitivity 
of  explosives  such  as  large-gap  tests1. Results  of 
those  experimental  methods  could  explain some 
aspects  of  shock  sensitivity  of  explosives but 
carry  only  a  fraction  of  information  on  shock 
sensitivity.  The  more  practical  way  is  to  use 
numerical  simulations  with  reaction  rate  models 
based on theories calibrated by using experimental 
data collected in the shock initiation or detonation 
Among  others  Mader  and  Forest2 proposed 
the  Forest  Fire FF  rate model  that  can  be 
calibrated  with  data  from  a  series  of  shock 
initiation  experiments  called  wedge  tests1
explosives  exhibiting  sharp  shock  to  detonation 
transition  SDT.  The  FF  rate  model  may  be  the 
first reaction rate model based on a hydrodynamic 
theory and which can be calibrated systematically. 
Lee  and  Tarver3 proposed  a  phenomenological 
model  based  on  the  ignition  and  growth  concept 
which can be calibrated with data from embedded 
gauge  experiments.  Their  model  first  brought  the 
importance  of  ignition  into  attention  and  thus  is 
often  called  the  ignition  and  growth  model.  Lee4
proposed  the  Bdzil-Lee  model5 based  on  the 
explosives. This model can be calibrated with data 
from two-dimensional detonation experiments.
The  objective  of  this  study  is  to  calibrate  a
reaction  rate  for  a  test  explosive7 containing  a 
large amount of HNIW known as CL-20. The rate 
model chosen for the test explosive is the FF rate 
model. The calibrated reaction rate is to be used in 
hydrodynamic simulations for shock initiation and 
detonation applications.
The plan of this paper is as follows. Section 2 
summarizes  theoretical  background  related  with 
the  FF  rate model.    Section  3  describes  the  test 
explosive and experimental details of wedge tests. 
Section  4  presents  the  calibrated  reaction  rate 
based  on  the  FF  model for  the  test  explosive  and 
the  results  of  numerical  simulations  of  the  wedge 
tests with the calibrated rate.
Theoretical Background
The  Euler  equations  in  one dimension  for  a 
where Uis the density u is the particle velocity E
is the specific internal energy P is the pressure V
1U  is  the  specific  volume  Ois  the  reaction 
extent or the mass fraction of the products and R
is  the  reaction  rate.  The  total  derivative ddt is 
Two  more  equations  an  equation  of  state 
EOS and a reaction rate are added
Eqs. 17 are enough to describe a reactive flow.
A reacting explosive is assumed to be an ideal 
mixture  of  reactants solid phase and  products
gas phase with the reaction extent O and thus it 
can  be  described  by  mixture  of  solid  and  gas 
Pressure  and  temperature  of  both  phases  are 
assumed to be in equilibrium
where the subscripts s and g refer to the solid and 
gas phases respectively and T is the temperature.
The  solid  phase  is  described  by  the  MieGrueneisen  EOS9 with  the  solid  Hugoniot  as  a 
where the subscript H denotes the solid Hugoniot
Cv is the specific heat at constant volume and  is 
the Grueneisen parameter defined by
PH EH and TH are  determined  along the  solid 
In this study the constant Vs model9 is used
in evaluation of the value of 
where the subscript o refers to the initial state.
The shock Hugoniot is given by
where  Us is  the  shock  velocity  and  Co and  S are 
the  bulk  sound  speed  and  the  proportionality 
constants respectively.
The  temperature  on  the  shock  Hugoniot  is 
calculated  by  the  Walsh  and  Christian  method9
and  fitted  to  a  fourth-order  polynomial  as  a 
function of the solid volume
where ai are fitting constants.
The E EOS8 is used to describe the gas phase 
with the isentrope passing through the CJ point as 
where the subscript R refers to the reference line 
PR ER TR are  determined  on  the  CJ  isentrope 
calculated by the BKW code10 and fitted to fourthorder polynomials
where bi ci and di are fitting constants and ce is a 
constant  added  to  avoid  the  argument  to  be
More  detailed  description  of  the  equation of 
state can be found in Ref. 4.
Mader  and  Forest2 have  observed  in  onedimensional  shock  initiation  experiments  wedge 
tests  that  the  shock  trajectories  obtained  for 
different  input  pressures  nearly  coincides if  the 
origins of the trajectories are shifted corresponding
to  the  transition  point.  This  has  led  to  the 
hypothesis  concerning  the  build  up  to  detonation 
known as the single-curve buildup hypothesis. To 
explain  the  observation  they  proposed  a  reactive 
shock within which some fraction of the explosive 
is reacted. This implies that the sensitivity plot of 
run distance versus input pressure the Pop plot1 is 
a  plot  of  the  single  curve.  Based  on  single-curve 
buildup  hypothesis  they  have  developed  the  FF
rate  model  in  which  the  rate  is  a  function  of 
pressure  only.  The  FF  rate model  has  been 
successfully applied to many explosives including 
PBX-9404 and Comp B.
Starting from Eqs. 17 one can derive the 
FF rate RFF with  the  zero  pressure  gradient 
where z  CUs-u and the notation of the comma 
subscript refers  to  a  partial  derivative. Derivation 
of  Eq.  24  can  be  found  in  Ref.  11. In  Eq.  24 
is the slope of the Pop plot. This means 
that  the  FF rate  for  an  explosive  can  be  obtained 
from the results of a series of wedge tests the solid 
Hugoniot and the Pop plot.
The rate is calculated from Eq. 24 and fitted 
to  a  fourth-order  polynomial  as  a  function  of  the 
where ei is a fitting constant. The rate is assumed 
to be a first-order reaction
Lundstrom12 has  derived  the  FF  rate  without 
assuming the reactive shock and the zero pressure 
In this study the FF rate for the test explosive 
is calibrated by using Eqs. 27 and 28.
The  test  explosive7 used  in  this  study  is  a 
HNIW or  CL-20-based  PBX.  Its composition  is 
HNIW  92plastic  binder 8 in  weight.  The 
nominal  density  is  1.884  gcm3.  The  detonation 
velocity at infinite diameter is 8.905 mmPs.
To  determine  the  unreacted  shock  Hugoniot 
and the run distance to detonation five wedge tests 
were  conducted.  The  configuration  of  the  wedge 
tests  is shown  in  Fig.  1. In  each  test  the  test 
explosive was prepared into a wedge with a height 
of  20  mm  and  an  angle  of  26.  On  the  inclined 
surface of the wedge a glass slide with a thickness 
of 0.2 mm was placed.  The side of the glass slide
contacting  the  wedge  was  coated  with  aluminum 
so that the light reflecting at the coated surface is
turned  off when  the  shock  wave  arrives at  the 
Fig. 1. Wedge test configuration.
The  plane  wave  generator  was  200  mm  in
diameter.  The  booster  made  of  LX-1413 was  30 
mm  in  thickness.  The  thickness  of  the  PMMA 
attenuator was varied from 50 to 120 mm resulting 
the pressure at the interface of from 5 to 11 GPa.
The arrival of the shock  wave at the  inclined 
surface was recorded by using a streak camera at a 
writing speed of 10 mmPs while illuminated by a 
Ar flash. A typical streak camera record is shown 
in  Fig.  2.  The  free-surface  velocity  ufs of  the 
attenuator was  measured  by  using  a  VISAR 
system  and  is  listed  with  the  corresponding 
pressure P in Table 1.
Fig. 2. Streak camera record Test 5.
Table 1. Properties of the PMMA attenuator.
Results and Discussions
The shock velocity Us and the run distance
to detonation Xr from the streak camera records
together  with  the  pressure  Pi  and  the  particle
velocity  ui  at  the  interface calculated  by  the 
impedance match method are listed in Table 2. In 
determination of the run distance to detonation Xr 
the  transition  time  was  calculated  by  finding  the 
intersection of two lines fitting the shock trajectory
in shock regime and detonation regime around the 
position at the transition time or the run distance 
to  detonation was  read  from  the  experimental 
shock  trajectory. The  shock  velocity Us  was 
transition  point  and 
calculated  by  fitting  only  the  early  part  of  the 
Table 2. Results of the wedge tests.
where Us and u are given in mmPs. 
The  pressure  and  the  particle  velocity at  the 
wedge  interface  were  determined  by  using  the 
impedance match method. In this method the state 
of  the  PMMA  attenuator  was  obtained from the 
free-surface velocity of the attenuator measured by
using a VISAR system. The reflected Hugoniot of 
the attenuator centered on the state was calculated. 
The state of the wedge was determined by finding 
the  intersection  between  the  reflected  Hugoniot 
and the shock impedance line based on the initial 
shock  velocity  in  the  wedge.  This  procedure  is 
briefly illustrated in Fig. 3.
Fig. 4. Shock Hugoniot of the test explosive.
The  Pop  plot  of  the  test  explosive  was 
obtained  by  fitting  the  run  distance  to  detonation
Xr as  a  function  of  the  pressure  at  the  wedge 
interface Pi assuming a linear relationship
where  Xr and  Pi are  given  in  mm  and  GPa 
respectively. The Pop plot of the test explosive is 
Fig. 3. Impedance match method.
The  shock  Hugoniot  of  the  test  explosive  in 
the  Us vs  u domain  was  obtained  by  fitting  the 
shock velocity as a function of the particle velocity
assuming a linear relationship as shown in Fig. 4
Fig. 5. Pop plot of the test explosive.
The Pop plot of the test explosive is compared 
with those of PBX-94041 and Comp. B1 in Fig. 6.
One notable aspect of the test explosive is that the 
slope of its Pop plot is much different from those 
of PBX-9404 and Comp. B. Based on the position 
of the Pop plot of the test explosive it is expected 
that  the  test  explosive  is  more  sensitive  to  shock 
than Comp. B and less sensitive than PBX-9404.
Fig. 6. Pop plot comparison.
Single-Curve Buildup Hypothesis
records.  The  origins  of 
The most important assumption in the FF rate 
model is the single-curve buildup hypothesis. The 
shock  trajectories  of  all  tests  were  read  from  the 
trajectories  were  shifted  corresponding to  the 
transition  points  and  plotted  together. All  the 
trajectories coincided very well as shown in Fig. 7.
This  coincidence  implies  that  the  single-curve 
buildup  hypothesis  is  verified  at  least  for  the  test 
Fig. 7. Buildup to detonation.
test  explosive  was 
determined  from the shock Hugoniot and the Pop 
plot by using Eqs. 27 and 28 and then fitted to 
a fourth-order polynomial
where e0  -5.471 e1  2.471 e2  -0.04083 e3  0.001333  and  e4  -0.003543  and  RFF and  P are 
given in Ps-1 and GPa respectively.
Numerical Simulation
To  verify  the  FF  rate calibrated  for  the  test 
tests  were  numerically 
simulated with the rate by using a one-dimensional 
Lagrangian  hydrodynamic  code.  The  numerical 
system was configured in the order of the booster 
the  PMMA  attenuator  and the test  explosive.  To 
resolve the reaction properly the cell size was set 
to 0.01 mm and the time step was set to 0.0002 Ps
for numerical stability.
For  the  booster  LX-14  a  program  burn  the 
volume  burn  model8 was  employed.  For  the  test 
explosive  the  calibrated  FF  rate  Eq.  31 was
used. The EOS parameters of the test explosive for 
the  solid  phase  was  obtained  based  on 
experimentally  determined  shock  Hugoniot  and 
those  for  the  gas  phase  was  obtained  from  the 
BKW code10 and they are listed in Table 3 and 4 
respectively. The  value  of 
parameter o of the test explosive was arbitrarily 
set to 1. It has to be noted that all parameters are 
given in gcm3 mmPs GPa and cal.
Table 3. EOS parameters for the solid phase
Table 4. EOS parameters for the gas phase
the  attenuator  of 
In  preliminary  calculations  it  was  found  that 
the  shock  pressure 
experimental  thicknesses  at  the  wedge  interface
was  considerably  higher 
observations  especially  at  a  low  initial  pressure.
Because the  value  of  the  initial  pressure  at  the 
interface  was  believed  to be  more  important  than 
the  experimental  details  it  was  decided  to  adjust 
the  thickness  of  the  attenuator  and  the  booster  to 
match  the  observed  initial  shock  pressure  at  the 
wedge  interface in  the  simulation  of  the  wedge 
pressure of from 5.2 to 10.6 GPa were numerically 
simulated.  In  interpretation  of  the  results  the 
shock  position  was  assumed  to  be  the  position  of 
the  highest  pressure.  The  calculated  shock 
trajectories  are  plotted  and  compared  with  the 
experimental  observations in  Figs.  8-12. The 
trajectories  agree  very  well  with 
experimental  observations
relatively high initial pressure of from 7.9 to 10.6 
GPa Figs. 8 9 and 11. For tests of the relatively 
low pressure of from 5.2 to 6.2 GPa Figs. 10 and 
12  the  calculated  shock  trajectories  were  slightly 
ahead  of  the  experimental trajectories  the  reason 
of which will be discussed later.
Fig. 8. Shock trajectory in Test 1.
Fig. 9. Shock trajectory in Test 2.
Fig. 10. Shock trajectory in Test 3.
tests.  The  superposition  of  the  shock  trajectories 
the  single-curve  buildup  hypothesis. 
Based on the shock Hugoniot and the Pop plot the 
FF  rate  was  calibrated.  The  shock  trajectories 
calculated  by  using  the  calibrated  FF  rate  agree 
The  Forest  Fire  rate  model  has  some  merits 
and demerits. The merits are it is mathematically 
rigorous  and  the  calibration  is  straightforward.
The  demerits  are  it  is  based  on  the  arguable 
single-curve buildup hypothesis and data used for 
calibration  carry  information  of  leading  shock 
The  single-curve  buildup  hypothesis  was 
verified  for  the  test  explosive.  It  may  be  because 
the test explosive contains a very large amount of 
the  most  sensitive 
The  Forest  Fire  rate  calibrated  for  the  test 
observed  in  the  wedge  tests.  Though  it  was 
obtained  only  for  one-dimensional 
agreement  is  good  enough  to  give  confidence  on 
the Forest Fire rate model. The rate will be applied 
to numerical simulation of two-dimensional shock 
initiation  tests  such  as  large-scale  gap  tests  and 
modification  of  the  rate  will  be  studied  in  near The Effect of the Binder on the Performance of TATB Based Insensitive High 
James W. Ferguson and Ben D. Sutton 
AWE Aldermaston RG7 4PR UK 
Abstract. The performance of two different explosives with the same TATB content but 
different  binders  are  compared.  This  comparison  was  undertaken  using  results  from 
cylinder tests and rate sticks. An additional comparison of  the velocity  of detonation is 
made with PBX9502. These results indicate that changing the binder has had a significant 
effect on the velocity of detonation and has led to a wave shape with greater curvature. 
Developing insensitive high explosives IHEs 
with improved performance is a significant area of 
research.  IHEs  typically  have  much  improved 
safety  properties  compared  to  conventional  high 
Two different IHEs are presented in this work 
both  use  triaminotrinitrobenzine  TATB  as  their 
sole  explosive  component.  The  composition  of 
both  explosives  is  95  TATB  with  5  binder. 
However  the  first  explosive  EDC35  uses  Kel-F 
800  as  a  binder  the  second  IHE  A  uses 
THV221GZ.  To  model  the  performance  of  an 
explosive  the  equation  of  state  EoS  and  the 
detonation  velocity  wave  curvature  relationship 
DK  must  be  known.  Cylinder  tests  are  a 
convenient means to obtain the Jones-Wilkins-Lee 
JWL  EoS  and  rate  sticks  allow  the  DK  to  be 
Experimental Overview 
tests  consist  of  a  cylinder  of 
explosive  contained  within  an  open  ended  metal 
cylinder. The containing cylinder used in this work 
was made of copper this is the traditional material 
of  choice.  The  tube  material  must  have  a  well 
understood  EoS  and  be  sufficiently  ductile  as  to 
expand  to  several  times  its  initial  volume  before 
fracturing. The explosive is initiated from one end 
the  velocity  of  detonation  VoD  and 
subsequent  expansion  of  the  copper  cylinder  wall 
traditional  cylinder 
diagnostics1  electrical  probe  boards  to  measure 
the full expansion of the cylinder wall and a prism 
and  streak  camera  combination  to  measure  the 
early expansion in detail. The IHE A experiments 
these  with  heterodyne  velocimetry 
as  photon  Doppler 
velocimetry  PDV.  The  new  and  old  diagnostics 
have  previously  been  shown  to  give  comparable 
results2.  The  VoD  was  measured  using  electrical 
contact  probes  in  both  cases  additional  VoD 
measurements were obtained from the HetV jump 
off times in the IHE A experiments. A schematic 
of the cylinder test set up is shown in Fig.1. 
Rate  sticks  like  cylinder  tests  consist  of  a 
cylinder  of  explosive  however  in  this  case  it  is 
unconfined.  The  explosive  is  initiated  from  one 
end  and  the  velocity  of  detonation  is recorded  as 
the  detonation  wave  progresses 
explosive.  When  the  detonation  wave  reaches  the 
end  face  of  the  cylinder  it  will  break  out  from 
the  surface  this  break  out  is  measured  using  a 
prism  and  streak  camera.  Using  the  break  out 
times and the velocity  of detonation it is possible 
to reconstruct the shape of the detonation wave in 
the explosive. Fig.2 shows a schematic of the rate 
to  be  made  between 
The density of an explosive directly affects its 
velocity of detonation. IHE A had a slightly lower 
density than EDC35 so would be expected to have 
a  lower  velocity  of  detonation.  To  remove  the 
effect  of  the  different  densities  to  allow  a  fair 
explosives the results needed to be scaled to have 
the same effective density. The correction factor of 
2.62 mms-1gcc-1 was used as suggested by Hare 
et  al3  for  PBX9502  an  IHE  with  the  same 
composition as EDC35  
Velocity of Detonation 
The  velocity  of  detonation  as  measured  by 
cylinder tests for the two explosives are shown in 
Table 1. Velocity of detonation as measured in the 
IHE A scaled to EDC35 density 
Rate  sticks  are  performed  using  a  range  of 
explosive  diameters.  EDC35  has  been  more 
extensively  investigated  than  IHE  A.  There  are 
sufficient  data  for  a  relationship  between  the 
inverse charge radius and the VoD to  be derived. 
The  results  for  IHE  A  are  plotted  against  this 
relationship in Fig. 3. The EDC35 data is made up 
of data from Hutchinson4 et al Collyer et al5 and 
previously unpublished data. 
Fig.3 clearly shows that IHE A has a reduced 
VoD compared to EDC35 this is true for both the 
raw  data  and  the  density  corrected  data.  This 
agrees with the reduced VoD recorded by cylinder 
tests for IHE A as shown in Table 1. 
The  wave  shape  data  that  is  available  for 
EDC35  was  performed  using  different  diameter 
rate sticks than the IHE A data. Whilst this is not 
ideal  it  has  not  hindered  the  conclusions  that  are 
drawn from this work. Wave shapes from two IHE 
A  rate  sticks  with  diameters  20  and  30  mm  are 
Fig  1.  Schematic  of  cylinder test  set  up.  A  is  the 
copper cylinder B the detonator and C one of the 
Fig  2.  Schematic  of  the  rate  stick  set  up.  The 
yellow  cylinder  near  A  is  the  explosive  B 
indicates  the  detonator  position  the  green  board 
near C is the VoD probe board and D is the prism. 
shown along with EDC35 rate sticks of 15 and 25 
previous section as a tighter wave shape leads to a 
reduced VoD. An automatic edge location tool was 
used  to  analyse  the  IHE  A  data  this  locates  the 
edge of the data and then applies a second order fit 
the  detonation  wave  will 
At  the  boundary  between  the  explosive  and 
characteristic angle this is known as the boundary 
angle.  To  produce  an  estimate  of  the  boundary 
angle  a  straight  line  fit  was  applied  to  the  two 
outermost  points  on  each  side  of  the  raw  wave 
shape  data.  The  average  boundary  angle  for  each 
IHE  A  rate  stick  is  shown  in  Table  2.  Previous 
work5  has  used  a  value  of  50  for  the  EDC35 
boundary angle.     
Table  2.  Average  measured  boundary  angles  for 
IHE A from the two rate sticks 
Rate Stick Diameter  Average Boundary Angle 
Cylinder Wall Expansion 
A  comparison  between  the  cylinder  wall 
velocity as a function of radial expansion for IHE 
A and EDC35 is shown in Fig.5. This shows that 
the two explosives have a similar ability to move 
metal. IHE A has a greater velocity around 7 mm 
expansion and appears to tend to a slightly higher 
velocity  at  larger  expansions.  The  ringing  of  the 
shock in the copper wall can be seen in the IHE A 
trace  the  full  motion  for  EDC35  was  recorded 
using  the  old  probe  board  diagnostics  which  did 
not  have  the  fidelity  to  measure  this.  Fig.6.  is  a 
comparison  of  the  early  motion  for  the  two 
explosives it shows that IHE A has a higher initial 
jump  off  velocity  than  EDC35.  This  jump  off 
velocity is sensitive to the detonation wave shape 
a  more  curved  wave  shape  would  yield  a  higher 
jump  off  velocity  for  a  given  explosive.  This  is 
because  the  HetV  probes  are  orientated  at  90  to 
the  wall  of  the  copper  cylinder  a  more  curved 
wave shape would lead to a higher component of 
the  initial  shock  velocity  along  the  axis  of  the 
Fig.3. Plot of VoD as a function of inverse charge 
radius. Open red circles are EDC35 the red line is 
a  fit  to  the  EDC35  data.  Open  blue  squares  are 
IHE A. Closed  blue squares are IHE A shifted to 
take different density into account. 
Fig.4.  Comparison  of  wave  shapes  from  rate 
sticks EDC35 25 mm diameter A IHE A 30 mm 
B IHE A 20 mm C and EDC35 15 mm D 
As  rate  sticks  increase  in  diameter  the  wave 
curvature will reduce in the case of an infinite rate 
stick  there  would  be  zero  curvature.  Fig.4  shows 
that the detonation wave in the 30 mm IHE A rate 
stick  has  a  greater  curvature  than  in  the  25  mm 
EDC35 rate  stick. The  wave  shape  in  the  20 mm 
IHE  A  rate  stick  is  much  closer  to  the  15  mm 
the  25  mm  result.  The 
conclusion from Fig.4 is that the detonation wave 
curvature is greater in IHE A than in EDC35. This 
is  consistent  with  the  VoD  data  presented  in  the 
probe.  This  effect  was  proposed  as  the  source  of 
the  higher  jump  off  velocities  seen  in  EDC37 
cylinder  tests  in  the  pre-steady  state  detonation 
curvature  measured  by  the  rate  sticks.  The  early 
motion for EDC35 was measured using prisms and 
streak cameras not the HetV that was used for IHE 
is  consistent  with 
One  possible  cause  of  this  is  the  formation  of  an 
insipient  spall  layer  which  then  closes  up.  A 
similar feature was seen in previous EDC37 work2 
before  steady  state  was  reached  i.e.  when  the 
wave  curvature  was  greater.  Another  feature  of 
the  HetV  traces  was  the  presence  of  a  jump  in 
velocity  on most of the traces at large expansions 
late times. This can be seen in Fig.7 and Fig.8. 
Fig.5. Cylinder wall velocity as a function of radial 
expansion for IHE A solid blue lines and EDC35 
Fig.7. Shows three HetV traces for IHE A showing 
the cylinder wall velocity as a function of time. 
Fig.6. Cylinder wall velocity as a function of radial 
expansion for IHE A solid blue lines and EDC35 
Fig 5 and Fig.6 both show that the presence of 
a  spike  in  the  velocity  on  the  second  shock 
reverberation for IHE A it is possible that this is 
also seen in the prism data for EDC35 however it 
cannot be resolved properly  because of the noise. 
Fig.8. A close up view of the jump in velocity seen 
in the three traces shown in Fig.7. 
Looking at the raw HetV data it is possible to 
see  what  looks  like  a  splitting  of  the  velocity 
profile. Initially the higher velocity trace is weaker 
in  signal  strength  until  it  eventually  becomes  the 
dominant  signal  this  is  the  point  at  which  the 
velocity  traces  shown  previously  jump  up.  An 
example  of  a  raw  HetV  trace  is  shown  in  Fig.9. 
with Fig.10 focussing in on the region of interest. 
Fig.9 shows that around the point at which the 
velocity trace steps up there is also an increase in 
the  amount  of  sprayejecta.  A  potential  cause  for 
both the increase in ejecta and the splitting of the 
velocity trace is that the cylinder wall is starting to 
explosive  PBX9502  has 
constituent  components  to  EDC35  however  the 
TATB  particle  size  distributions  do  differ.  There 
are  two  versions  of  PBX9502  virgin  material 
with a coarser particle size and recycled with a 
finer  particle  size.  The  VoD  as  a  function  of 
inverse charge radius for both PBX9502 variants is 
shown in Fig.11 along with the EDC35 and IHE A 
results previously presented. All the data has been 
scaled  to  have  the  same  density  using  the  2.62 
mms-1gcc-1  correction  factor.  The  recycled  data 
set comes from Campbell7 the virgin from Hill et 
Fig.9.  HetV  trace  of  the  velocity  of  the  cylinder 
Fig.10.  Focussing  on the region  of  interest  of  the 
HetV trace shown in Fig.9.  
The  data  presented  in  the  previous  section 
shows  that  IHE  A  has  a  reduced  velocity  of 
detonation  when  compared  to  EDC35  this  is 
consistent  with  the  observation  that  a  detonation 
wave in IHE A has a greater wave curvature than 
Fig.10 VoD as a function of inverse charge radius 
for  IHE  A  solid  blue  circles  EDC35  open  red 
squares  and  virgin  PBX9502  closed  green 
triangles.  All  data  has  been  scaled  to  have  the 
same effective density. 
Fig.10  shows  that  EDC35  has  a  slower  VoD 
than the fine PBX9502 over the whole range and 
appears  to  have  a  different  shape.  The  virgin 
PBX9502  on  average  has  a  higher  VoD  than 
EDC35  although  appears  to  be  slightly  lower 
around 0.1 mm-1. The difference between the two 
PBX9502 varieties has been explained previously8 
as  being  due  to  differences  in  effective  particle 
size.  The  virgin  PBX9502  has  a  coarser  particle 
size  compared  to  the  recycled  PBX9502.  EDC35 
has  a  different  particle  size  distribution  to  both 
PBX9502 variants. It is clear from Fig.10 that IHE 
A  has  a  reduced  performance  compared  to  both 
PBX9502 and EDC35. This reduction is apparent 
5.  Collyer  AM.  Dunnett  JD.  Swift  DC.  and 
White  SJ.  WBL  Detonation  Wave  Propagation 
for  EDC35  and  EDC37  Proceedings  of  the  11th 
International  Detonation  Symposium  pp12-28 
6. Bdzil J. Steady-State Two-Dimensional 
Detonation Journal of Fluid Mechanics 108 
7.  Campbell  AW.  Diameter  and  Failure 
a  TATB-Based  Explosive 
Propellants  Explosives  Pyrotechnics  9  pp183- 
8.  Hill  LG.  Bdzil  JB.  Davies  WC.  and 
Critchfield RR. PBX9502 Front Curvature Rate 
Stick  Data  Repearability  and  the  Effects  of 
Temperature and Material Variation Proceedings 
of the 13th International Detonation Symposium 
pp331-341 Norfolk VA 2006 
despite  having  a  particle  size  distribution  that 
should be the same as EDC35.   
IHE A has a lower velocity of detonation than 
EDC35 and  correspondingly  a  more  curved  wave 
shape.  These  differences  are  beyond  what  can  be 
explained by either a difference in density shown 
by  applying  a  scaling  factor  that  works  for  two 
similar  IHEs  or any  likely  difference  in  particle 
size shown by comparing to three IHEs  with the 
same  TATB  content  but  different  particle  size 
distributions.  For  this  reason  it  appears  that  the 
binder is the source of this reduction in detonation 
velocity  performance.  IHE  A  appears  to  have 
comparable ability to move metal to EDC35 once 
the  effect  of  the  difference  in  wave  shape  on  the 
early  expansion  has  been  considered.  This  shows 
the  effect  of  the  different  binder  is  minimal  soon 
after the products begin to expand. Propagation Distance Required to Reach Steady-State Detonation Velocity in
Finite-Sized Charges
Jianling Li XiaoCheng Mi and Andrew J. Higgins
National Key Laboratory of Shock Wave and Detonation Physics
Institute of Fluid Physics China Academy of Engineering Physics Mianyang Sichuan China
McGill University Montreal Quebec Canada
Abstract. The decay of a detonation wave from its initial CJ velocity to its nal steady
state velocity upon encountering a nite thickness or diameter charge is investigated numerically and theoretically. The numerical simulations use an ideal gas equation of state
and pressure-dependent reaction rate in order to ensure a stable wave structure. The connement is also treated as an ideal gas with variable impedance. The velocity decay along
the centerline is extracted from the simulations and compared to predictions based on a
front evolution equation that uses the steady state detonation velocity-front curvature relation DN-. This model fails to capture the nite signaling speed of the leading rarefaction
resulting from the interaction with the yielding connement. This signaling speed is veried to be the maximum signal velocity occurring in the ideal ZND wave structure of the
initial CJ velocity. A simple heuristic model based on the rarefaction generated by a onedimensional interaction between the post-shock state and the connement is proposed to
provide an approximate description of the remainder of the relaxation process to steady
A detonation in a sufciently large charge will
propagate at a velocity at or very near the ideal
Chapman Jouguet CJ detonation velocity of the
explosive. Upon encountering an abrupt transition
to a charge of nite diameter or thickness the detonation wave will undergo a decay in velocity to a
steady state propagation velocity less than the CJ
velocity provided that the dimension diameter or
thickness of the charge is greater than some critical
value required for successful propagation. While
there is a comprehensive literature devoted to determining the steady state detonation velocity in nite
sized charges and its dependence on the charge dimension the decay or relaxation process has not
been as extensively studied. The issue of the decay
in velocity to steady state is frequently encountered
in the design of experiments intended to measure
the steady state propagation velocity in cylindrical
charges i.e. rate-stick tests wherein the question
of how long the wave must propagate in order to
reach effectively constant velocity is encountered.
The usual criterion used is that the wave must propagate on the order of ve to ten diameters although
anecdotal accounts of charges that required signicantly longer run distances to reach steady state can
also be found. The origin of this criterion is un
777
known to the authors.
One of the earliest investigations of the propagation distance required to reach steady state is that
of Cook et al.1 2 who examined the radius of curvature of a point-initiated detonation via a detonator in cylinders of explosive. The radius of the
wave initially grew linearly with propagation distance following a geometrical spherical expansion
until after encountering the edge of the explosive
cylinder the wave evolved to a constant curvature
state. For the explosives studied by Cook et al. this
process required a propagation distance of approximately ve diameters to reach a steady state front
curvature which may be the origin of the criterion
used in determining where steady state propagation
begins in a rate-stick test. If these results are relevant to the relaxation of a planar-initiated detonation wave and how the decay process depends on
the properties of the connement the diameter or
thickness of the charge in comparison to the critical
thickness and on the wave structure of the detonation itself have not been quantied.
This paper uses computational simulations to investigate how an ideal CJ detonation decays to a
steady state wave propagating in a nite diameter or thickness charge with yielding connement.
For simplicity the ideal gas law is used for the equation of state and a pressure-dependent reaction rate
with pressure exponent n  2 or 3 is used to generate a stable detonation wave structure. The results
of the simulations are then compared to the predictions of the theory of Detonation Shock Dynamics
DSD and a simple heuristic model that attempts
to describe the decay process in terms of rarefaction
Computational Simulations
The problem considered is shown schematically
in Fig. 1. The detonation is initialized as a onedimensional ZND-type wave propagating at
ideal CJ detonation velocity. The wave then propagates into a layer of nite thickness in twodimensional simulations or a cylinder of nite
diameter in axisymmetric simulations bounded
by an inert medium. The explosive medium and
connement are both modeled as an ideal gas of
equal molecular weight and ratio of specic heats
  1.333 i.e. a single gas formulation. The
impedance of the connement was varied by varying the temperature and density of the connement
while maintaining the pressure as constant. In order
to have a wave with a laminar-like structure i.e.
no cellular structure a pressure-based reaction rate
where Z is the reaction progress variable Z  0
for unreacted and Z  1 for fully reacted and the
values of n  2 and 3 are used.
The unsteady two-dimensional Euler equations
coupled with a pressure-dependent reaction rate
were solved by using a second-order accurate algorithm.
In order to isolate the stiff source term of
chemical reaction a second-order accurate Strang
operator splitting method3 was employed. The
AUSM scheme4 was used to deal with the inviscid ux as a sum of the convective and pressure terms recognizing the convection and acoustic waves as two physically distinct processes. A
third-order TVD Runge-Kutta method4 was used
for the temporal discretization. The boundary condition along the x-axis was a mirror boundary condition axis of symmetry so that only the upper
half of the layer was simulated in the case of a
two-dimensional slab. The upper boundary of the
computational domain above the inert layer was a
supersonic outow condition to ensure that no reected waves return into the computational domain.
A geometric source term was included in axisymmetric calculations to simulate detonation propagation in a cylindrical charge of explosive surrounded
by an annular layer of inert connement.
The simulations were conducted in the laboratory
reference frame with the computational domain periodically shifted to prevent the detonation from encountering the end of the domain. The downstream
region of the domain that was truncated was always
located beyond the location of the limiting characteristic following the detonation to ensure that there
was no inuence on the wave dynamics by this process. A thorough grid resolution study was conducted and determined that the global dynamics of
the wave are not inuenced as the grid resolution
was increased beyond 5 computational cells per half
reaction zone length of the ideal CJ detonation the
details of this resolution study are given in Ref. 7.
Unless otherwise noted the simulations reported
here were performed at a resolution of 5 cells per
half reaction zone length.
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the problem to
be studied showing the computational grid for a
two-dimensional slab and b axisymmetric geometries and c regions of simulation.
The results were post-processed to extract the dynamics of the detonation front. For each output data
le the location where the density along the centerline of the charge the lower boundary of the simulations increased to twice the initial density of the
explosive was considered as the position of the leading shock front at that time. The data of leading
shock position vs. time was then converted to detonation velocity vs. time via a central differencing
The results of the simulations are shown in Fig. 2.
Figure 2 a shows the effect of varying the charge
thickness in a two-dimensional simulation of different thicknesses with pressure exponent n  2
and the impedance of the connement equal to that
of the explosive. The time since the detonation
front rst encounters the nite thickness or diameter charge has been normalized by a characteristic
time tc for a uid particle passing through the reaction zone which is dened as the half reaction
zone thickness of the ideal CJ detonation L12 divided by the von Neumann uid velocity with re
spect to the leading wave front and the detonation
velocity normalized by the ideal CJ detonation velocity. The wave is seen to continue to propagate
at constant velocity along the centerline for some
distance prior to beginning the decay process. The
arrival of this initial disturbance along the centerline is treated in detail later in the paper. The larger
thickness charges exhibit less of a velocity decit
because of the comparatively smaller losses in momentum due to lateral expansion of the products
into the yielding connement. The nal steady state
velocity for the case in Fig. 2 is shown to correspond well to a simple curvature-based model originating with Eyring et al.5 and using a normal detonation velocity-curvature DN- relation obtained
by integrating the differential equation of Wood and
Kirkwood6. This model can be shown to be equivalent to the predictions of DSD if the same DN relation is used additional details are given in
Figure 2 b shows the effect of varying the
impedance of the connement by changing the density and inversely the temperature of the inert gas
at constant pressure for a two dimensional slab of
thickness 121 L12. The higher impedance denser
connement exhibits less of a velocity decit due
to the greater connement of the products provided
by the higher impedance inert layer. In the case of
high impedance connement an even simpler onedimensional stream tube model that uses Newtonian
hypersonic impact theory to model the interaction
with the connement has proven to be very successful in predicting the steady state velocity.7
Figure 2 c shows an example of the results for
axisymmetric simulations cylindrical charges for
the same conditions as in Fig. 2 a. The simulation
is presented with the diameter of the axisymmetric
charge paired with charge of thickness 121 L12
equal to half that diameter since cylindrical charges
of diameter equal to twice the thickness of a slab
charge are expected to reach the same steady state
velocity. This 2  1 scaling between diameter and
thickness was veried in the study of Li et al.7 A
steeper initial deceleration of the wave can be seen
in the axisymmetric case followed by a more oscillatory behavior in comparison to the analogous planar case. Figure 2 d shows the effect of varying the
pressure exponent from n  2 to 3 in a two dimen
779
ExplosiveComputational domainInertxyExplosiveComputational domainInertxyabxyIgnitionzoneZND waveInert gasExplosivecDetonationwave frontFig. 2. Detonation velocity normalized by ideal CJ velocity as a function of time normalized by characteristic time showing the effect of varying a charge thickness b impedance of the connement c charge
geometry and d pressure exponent on the decay of a detonation wave from its initial CJ velocity to the
steady state terminal velocity.
sional simulation of the same normalized thickness
321 L12 and the impedance of the connement
equal to that of the explosive.
The results shown here are only a subset of all
simulations performed for purposes of clarity. Attempts by the authors to collapse all of these results
onto a single curve i.e. assuming the decay process is self-similar when scaled by charge or reaction zone thickness were unsuccessful. This nonself-similarity property can be attributed to the existence of multiple length scales in the problem the
detonation reaction zone thickness and the charge
Detonation Shock Dynamics
In order to treat problems involving transient
propagation of detonation fronts without having
to perform computationally intensive direct simulations the theory of Detonation Shock Dynamics DSD has been developed over the last three
decades.8 9 DSD treats detonation dynamics via a
front evolution equation that postulates a known relationship between propagation of the detonation
normal to the front and the local curvature of the
front DN- relation. The location of the front is
determined by the contour of a parabolic diffusionlike partial differential equation subject to boundary conditions. The result is similar to a classical Huygens construction for front propagation but
with the propagation velocity properly reecting the
slower velocity of a curved front. This method was
intended to solve problems similar to those considered in this paper but is subject to the limitation that
the reaction zone must be thin in comparison to the
radius of curvature of the front and the other length
scales involved in the problem of interest. One of
the rst applications of DSD theory was to solve the
same problem considered in this paper namely the
decay of a detonation initialized as a CJ detonation
to its steady state condition.10
With the DN- relation known the evolution of
the leading shock front in a two-dimensional planar
space xst y throughout the decay process can be
obtained by solving the following partial differential
0501001502000.80.850.90.951VVCJttcIE  10IE  5IE  10501001502000.80.850.90.951VVCJttcn 2n 30501001502000.80.850.90.951VVCJttc2Daxisymmetric  0501001502000.80.850.90.951VVCJttc402 L12241 L12161 L12121 L12badcFig. 3. Detonation velocity normalized by ideal CJ detonation velocity as a function of time normalized by
characteristic time compared to the predictions of DSD theory for equal impedance connement and n  2
in a two dimensional slab and b axisymmetric geometries. The solid lines are the results of simulations.
The dashed lines are the predictions of DSD theory.
where by denition  is
The boundary condition required to solve Eq. 2 i.e.
the angle of the leading shock front at the boundaries of the charge can be determined by shock
polar analysis. Additional details of this technique
can be found in Ref. 7. With the applied boundary
condition and DN- relation tted by a fourth-order
polynomial Eqs. 2 and 3 were solved numerically
using the method of lines.
In Fig. 3 the predictions of DSD theory of the
detonation velocity along the centerline are compared to the results of numerical simulations for
both two-dimensional and axisymmetric geometries at various thicknesses or diameters with the
impedance of the connement equal to that of the
explosive. The results shown in Fig. 3 indicate
poor agreement between the predictions of DSD
theory and the results of the numerical simulations
reported in the previous section. This discrepancy
is not due to the DN- relation used in implementing the DSD theory. The authors have previously shown that the steady propagation velocity
and front curvature measured from the simulations
match the predicted DN- relation obtained by integrating the Wood and Kirkwood model along the
central streamline.7 Rather the major discrepancy
of the DSD model can be attributed to its inability to
capture the nite signaling time required for the initial rarefaction to reach the charge centerline. This
hyperbolic wave-like phenomenon cannot be reproduced in the parabolic diffusion-like DSD evolution equation Eq. 2 above that results in an innite propagation velocity.
To address this deciency an improved DSD theory was developed that postulated a relation between the detonation velocity the rate of change
of detonation velocity and the curvature DN- DN.11 12 The governing equation in this improved
model exhibits both hyperbolic and parabolic behavior so it can successfully reproduce the nite propagation velocity of the leading rarefaction that signals the existence of the yielding
connement.11 12 This improved model however
requires solution of the governing PDE via numerical nite difference techniques a task which can
be as challenging as direct numerical simulation of
the Euler equations. In addition the required DNDN- relation can be only empirically obtained
and when implemented it has been t to direct numerical simulations.11 12 Furthermore as shown in
Fig. 3 b solving the DSD governing equation for
a two-dimensional planar space fails to capture the
steeper initial deceleration observed in the results
of axisymmetric simulations. In order to model the
evolution of detonation wave fronts in a cylindri
781
0501001502000.80.850.90.951VVCJttc402 L120501001502000.80.850.90.951VVCJttc241 L12161 L12121 L12161 L12121 L12abcal charge the DSD equation needs to be solved
in three-dimensional space or using an empirical
DN- DN- relation for the axisymmetric geometry.
Thus this approach is not conducive to simple estimates of the relaxation distance required to reach
steady state propagation and as such will not be
explored further here.
In order to provide a model that can be used for
quick engineering calculations of the distance required to reach steady state the phenomena observed in the simulations will be described by models that reect the gas dynamics occurring in the relaxation process.
The detonation wave will propagate along the
centerline of the charge at the ideal CJ velocity until
the information of yielding connement is communicated to the wave front at that location. A theoretical picture which describes this process was originally developed by Skews13 in the study of diffracting shock waves and applied to diffracting detonation waves by Schultz14. As illustrated in Fig. 4
the disturbance of yielding connement is transmitted to the wave front at the centerline of the charge
at the local speed of sound c while being advected
at velocity u in a laboratory-xed frame of reference. Hence the transverse signaling speed v is
determined using the velocity triangle in Fig. 4 as
The leading rarefaction propagates into the detonation ow at the maximum value of v within the reaction zone of the ZND detonation structure. By
solving the governing equations for a ZND detonation c and u can be obtained as functions of space
within the reaction zone. Then the spatial prole
of v can be calculated based on the solutions for c
and u and a maximum can be identied within this
Despite the accepted nature of this picture we
are not aware that this model of the leading rarefaction has been rigorously veried by numerical simulations. By applying the same wave front tracking method to the entire computational domain the
Fig. 4. Illustration of the leading disturbance from
yielding connement transversely propagating into
Fig. 5. Evolution of detonation wave front with
spatial coordinates normalized by L12 for a two
dimensional slab of thickness 121 L12 with equal
impedance connement and n  2. The solid
curves are the extracted wave fronts at different
times. The dashed line is the trajectory of the leading disturbance before reaching the centerline of the
complete prole of the leading shock front was extracted for each output data le. As shown in Fig. 5
a point separating the disturbed and undisturbed regions was identied on each prole. By calculating the slope of the straight line connecting these
separating points the numerical results of the leading rarefaction speed were obtained. As shown in
Fig. 6 as the grid resolution was increased to 15
computational cells per half reaction zone length
the numerical result of the leading rarefaction speed
xyDCJtutConcid31nementExplosivectvtDetonation wavefront0306090120150020406080L12xL12yConcid31nementExplosiveconverged to the value predicted by Eq. 4 evaluated
using the ZND structure of the ideal CJ detonation.
In order to account for the uncertainty in nding the
location of the leading disturbance error bars dened by the computational grid size divided by the
time interval between two consecutive output data
les are plotted with the numerical data points in
of detonation propagation with the driver conditions being taken as the von Neumann postshock state of the ideal CJ detonation and the
driven state being the connement.
3. The detonation continues to decay at the rate dictated by the initial rarefaction gradient until it
reaches the steady state velocity. The steady state
propagation velocity is assumed to be known. A
number of models with varying degree of sophistication are available to predict the steady
state velocity for a given explosive and connement. For the system studied here these models
are presented and compared in Ref. 7.
Fig. 6. Numerical results of the leading rarefaction
speed normalized by the ideal CJ velocity for pressure exponent n  2 square and n  3 circle
as a function of number of computational cells per
L12. Solid line is maximum signal speed of ideal
Rarefaction Gradient and Wave Deceleration
Beyond the leading rarefaction the detonation
deceleration becomes a complex process of unsteady and multidimensional gas dynamics as the
wave accommodates itself to the yielding connement.
It would be unrealistic to expect a simple
analytic model can capture the full details of this
process however a phenomenological model that
includes the correct physics may have some success in describing the relaxation rate. This model
is based on the following assumptions
1. The initial wave deceleration along the center
following the arrival of the leading rarefaction is
determined by the gradient of the rarefaction.
2. The rarefaction gradient can be approximated by
computing a one-dimensional shock tube problem in the direction perpendicular to the direction
Under assumption 2 the initial rarefaction gradient is independent of the connement material.
In a shock-tube problem the magnitude of the initial rarefaction gradient is independent of the driven
medium that the shock propagates into. Only the
duration of the rarefaction i.e. how long the rarefaction continues changes with varying conditions
in the driven state. This assumption appears to be
supported by the results shown in Fig. 2 b which
shows that the initial deceleration of the wave is the
same as the density of the connement is varied by
Once the leading rarefaction reaches the centerline of the charge the rarefaction waves emanating from the yielding connement on both sides of
the charge interact with each other and form a nonsimple wave region. This non-simple rarefaction
wave reduces the static pressure behind the leading
shock wave and thus causes the leading shock to decelerate. The ow condition within this non-simple
rarefaction wave at the centerline of the charge
only depends on the initial rarefaction gradient and
can be analytically determined by the method of
characteristics.15 By using Riemanns solution as
implemented by Rudinger see details in Ref. 15
the post-shock pressure inuenced by the interacting rarefaction waves at the centerline of the charge
can be obtained as a function of time.
For the case of a cylindrical charge the inward
propagating rarefaction results in an initially greater
rate of deceleration due to the geometric factor associated with the axisymmetric geometry. An analytical solution for an inward-propagating rarefaction is available from Greenspan and Butler16 and
vVCJ0.40.450.50.550.60481216Number of computational cells perL12extended and corrected by Rasmussen and Frair17
but this solution does not extend past the time when
the rarefaction begins to interact with the rarefaction
originating from the other side of the charge. Thus
it was necessary to rely upon numerical simulations
to determine the geometric factor in this case.
The one-dimensional non-reactive Euler equations were numerically solved using a second order accurate TVD scheme and MUSCL-Hancock
approach based on Godunovs ux-difference
splitting18 with the super-bee slope limiter19. To
take the geometric source term in axisymmetric
coordinates into account a second order accurate
source term splitting scheme and a two-stage explicit Runge-Kutta method were applied.20 This
simulation was validated by showing that the calculated time history of the pressure at the centerline
of a planar slab converges to Rudingers solution.
The numerical results show that the pressure at
the centerline in a cylindrical case decreases more
rapidly than that in a planar case does. The normalized time rate of change in the pressure at the centerline was calculated based on the numerical results
for both planar and cylindrical geometry
cid12cid12cid12cid12 1plan.
cid12cid12cid12cid12 1cyl.
where P is the pressure at the center normalized by
the initial pressure in the driver section and  is the
time normalized by the time required for the leading
rarefaction to reach the center of the charge. A geometric factor which can be applied to Rudingers
solution for planar geometry to approximate the solution in an axisymmetric case was determined as
Up to this point only the unreactive gasdynamic
aspect of the problem has been considered. In fact
the exothermic reaction acts like a piston to drive the
leading shock and tends to maintain the post-shock
pressure at the von Neumann condition. Hence it
is essential to consider the interaction between the
rarefaction wave reducing the post-shock pressure
and the exothermic reaction maintaining the postshock pressure. In this heuristic model the effect
of the reaction zone is simplied by introducing a
parameter of reaction inuence  which satises
the following relation
where the subscript ps denotes the post-shock
condition the superscript  denotes the solution
for unreactive gas dynamics and PvN is the von
Neumann pressure in the ideal ZND detonation.
According to Eq. 8 the actual value of Pps is between the unreactive post-shock pressure and PvN
as  varies from 0 to 1. As mentioned in assumption 3 the steady state to which the detonation decays can be successfully predicted by a number of
independent models. Hence  can be determined
by applying the steady states condition as follows
where Pss is the post-shock pressure for the steady
The decays of detonation velocity predicted by
this heuristic model are compared to the results of
simulations in Fig. 7. The model predictions of detonation velocity shown in Fig. 7 are functions of
time V t which can be converted to functions of
space V x via the following relation
where t is a dummy variable representing t.
Figure 7 a compares the model predictions to
the numerical results shown in Fig. 2 a. It is important to note that the predictions agree well with
numerical results for large thicknesses of the charge
however the model deviates from the numerical results as thickness decreases. The explanation is that
for smaller thicknesses the decay process is not
only inuenced by the initial rarefaction waves from
yielding connement but also by those reected
back into the charge from the material interface between the explosive and the connement media.
Figure 7 b compares the model prediction for
various impedances of the connement with the results of simulations shown in Fig. 2 b. The model
Fig. 7. Detonation velocity normalized by ideal CJ detonation velocity as a function of time normalized
by characteristic time compared to the predictions of the heuristic model showing the effect of varying a
charge thickness b impedance of the connement c charge geometry and d pressure exponent on the
decay of a detonation wave from its initial CJ velocity to the steady state terminal velocity. The dashed lines
are the predictions of the heuristic model.
well captures the feature that the decay rate of detonation velocity is independent of the impedance of
the connement. The only signicant inuence of
the connement is on the steady state velocity. Figure 7 c compares the model predictions for twodimensional slab and axisymmetric geometries with
the results of simulations shown in Fig. 2 c. By
considering a larger gradient of the initial rarefaction waves in cylindrical charges the model fairly
well predicts a steeper deceleration in the axisymmetric geometry than that in the two-dimensional
slab. Figure 7 d compares the model prediction
for different pressure exponents n  2 and 3 with
the results of simulations shown in Fig. 2 d. Although the initial rarefaction gradient is expected to
be the same for n  2 and 3 the model predicts a
slightly steeper decay for n  3 which has a shorter
half reaction zone length.
The results of the present investigation reiterate that problems in unsteady detonation dynam
ics are inherently problems of wave propagation
and correct description of the detonation relaxation
process must include the signaling via rarefaction
waves generated by the interaction with the connement. The original version of DSD theory using a parabolic front evolution equation fails to include this feature which has motivated more sophisticated models that include the rate of detonation deceleration. However until a theory that can
predict the relation between detonation velocity the
rate of change of velocity and the front curvature
DN- DN- is developed this model requires calibration via numerically intensive direct numerical
A simpler heuristic model proposed here which
treats the interaction with the connement via a onedimensional shock-tube like problem occurring orthogonal to the direction of propagation appears to
have some promise for quick calculation of the detonation decay rate to steady state. The model would
require further verication using numerical simulations with equations of state more representative of
actual explosives as well as comparison to experi
785
0501001502000.80.850.90.951VVCJttcn 2n 30501001502000.80.850.90.951VVCJttcIE  10IE  5IE  10501001502000.80.850.90.951VVCJttc2Daxisymmetric  0501001502000.80.850.90.951VVCJttc402 L12241 L12161 L12121 L12badcmental results in order for a comprehensive assessment of its usefulness to be made.Simulation of Shock Initiation Tests 
Jing Ping Lu Valerian A. Kuznetsov and Phillip Mellen
 Weapons and Combat Systems Division 
Defence Science and Technology Organisation 
P O Box 1500 Edinburgh SA 5111 AUSTRALIA 
Abstract.  The  objective  of  this  paper  is  the  use  of  experimental  data  collected  from 
instrumented shock initiation tests to develop and validate computer models which can 
be used to further investigate the shock response of energetic materials in cases where it 
is impractical or prohibitively expensive to conduct experiments.  
   The experiments involved determining a run-to-detonation distance in solid explosives 
using the well-known wedge test by varying the pressure input generated by the in-house 
produced  3  diameter  plane  wave  generator  PWG.  Two  different  shock-attenuation 
systems were investigated. One was a single inert PMMA attenuator and another a dual 
inert  materials  PMMA  and  aluminium  attenuator.  Calibration  curves  have  been 
developed for both systems to provide different input pressure levels as a function of the 
singlecombined attenuator thickness. The use of curved wavefronts of a finite duration in 
this  compact  HE  PWG  system  is  compensated  by  the  use  of  a  suitable  reactive  burn 
model Ignition and Growth reactive model.  
   The  Ignition  and  Growth  IG  reactive  model  in  LS-DYNA  has  been  calibrated 
against  the  detonation  velocity  versus  diameter  experimental  data  for  unconfined 
Composition  B  charges  containing  Type  I  RDX.  This  model  was  validated  against  the 
shock  initiation  data  from  Large  Scale  Gap  Tests  and  then  used  to  simulate  the  wedge 
tests in conjunction with the new ALE Arbitrary Lagrange-Eulerian 2D to 3D mapping 
technique  in  LS-DYNA  for  demonstrating  qualitative  approaches.  The  computed  shock 
wave  positions  versus  time  results  from  the  two  shock-attenuation  systems  were 
compared  with  those  measured  using  optical  fibre  arrays.  Different  methods  and 
Recommendations for future work are also made.  
run-distance-to-detonation  were 
Understanding  the  fundamental  detonation 
physics  of  initiation  and  growth  reactions  in 
explosives  is  of  vital  importance  for  both  hazard 
assessment  and  vulnerability  evaluation  of 
munitions  and  their  developmentapplications.  To 
characterise  these  important  behaviours  shock 
initiation  experiments  are  being  conducted  in  the 
Explosives  and  Pyrotechnics  Group 
Weapons and Combat Systems Division of DSTO. 
A program focussed on developing and validating 
hydrocode modelling methods is also being carried 
out  in  parallel  to  these  experiments. This  paper 
the  experimental  and  computational 
results  achieved  at  this  stage  of  the  ongoing 
research  into  the  modelling  of  shock  initiation 
experiments.  Differently  from  the  traditional  gas 
gun-fired  flying  plates  with  their  planarity  and 
spall  issues  this  study  uses  the  HE-driven  plane 
waves.  The  short  duration  of  the  pressure  wave 
and the curvature of the impact waves due to the 
compact  nature  of  the  HE  plane  wave  generator 
are dealt with by utilising a feasible model. 
The  widely  used  wedge  test12  has  been 
adopted  to  study  the  shock  initiation  process  of 
Composition  B  Comp  B  containing  Type  I 
Optical Pulse Timer OPT 
The DSTO Optical Pulse Timer OPT is an 
optoelectronic  system  that  takes  48  OM1  optical 
fibres as  the  input5. The light produced during an 
explosive event enters the optical fibres at one end 
propagates  through  the  optical  fibres  and  enters 
the  photodiodes  at 
threshold  intensity  of  the  photodiode  output  is 
reached  the  system  triggers  and  the  time  of 
triggering  is  registered.  If  the  entrances  of  the 
optical  fibres  are  positioned  in  the  path  of  the 
detonation  wave  at  known  positions  the  velocity 
of  the  detonation  wave  can  be  determined.  The 
time resolution of the OPT is 5 ns. 
the  receiver.  When 
Free Surface Velocity Measurement  
The  attenuator  output  shockwave  pressure 
was calculated from the free surface velocity. This 
velocity  was  measured  using 
technique6. The 1 mm air gap transition time of the 
shockwave  emerging  from  the  attenuator  was 
obtained  using  the  OPT  and  the  shockwave 
velocity  was  calculated.  PETN  paint  was  applied 
to  the  fibre  ends  to  ensure  a  clear  flash  was 
produced.  This  was  then  covered  with  0.11  mm 
thick aluminium tape to avoid pre-triggering of the 
OPT  due  to  the  translucence  of  Comp  B.  Two 
perpendicular  rows  of  optical  fibre  ends  were 
distributed  across  the  diameter  of  an  aluminium 
disk  holder.  One  of  the  rows  was  depressed  by  1 
mm  to  provide  a  1  mm  deep  gap  as  is  shown  in 
Fig.  1.  The  depression  is  manufactured  with  a 
tolerance better than 0.01 mm. Possible variations 
in the aluminium tape thickness PETN paint layer 
the  depression  depth  were 
considered to be negligible and were mitigated by 
having  an  excessive  number  of  measurement 
points  12  across  the  disk.  This  arrangement 
allows both the wave curvature and the shockwave 
pressure  distribution  to  be  measured  across  the 
cylindrically-symmetric explosive charge. 
Plane Wave Generator Shock-attenuation Systems 
       The  in-house  produced  3  diameter  plane 
wave  generator  PWG  consists  of  two-explosive 
components  and  an  embedded  conical  inert 
material lens Fig. 2. The PWG designs have been 
optimised by varying the height and base angle of 
the lens based on the wavefront planarity predicted 
by  modelled  results  and  the  time  difference 
measured with the OPT. The PWG has a diameter 
of  76  mm  whilst  the  area  of  the  output  planar 
shockwave  has  a  diameter  of  approximately  50 
mm  the  criterion  of  flatness  is  the  deviation  less 
than 50 ns or less than 0.4 mm in case of  Comp 
B.  After  propagating  60  mm  through  a  PMMA 
attenuator  as  per  the  older  PWG  design3  the 
planar  area  shrunk  is  approximately  25  mm  in 
diameter. This is less than the width of the base of 
the Comp B wedge and thus was unacceptable. In 
order to achieve the required cross-section size of 
output  planar  shockwave  a  composite  attenuator 
Fig.  1.  Surface-facing  side  of  the  aluminium  disk 
for  wave  curvature  and  free  surface  velocity 
dissipation of energy out of the sides of the wedge 
self  confinement.  The  wedge  base  was  exposed 
shockwave  propagated  through  the  wedge  and 
emerged  at  its  inclined  surface  against  which  a 
series  of  optical  fibre  tips  were  pressed.  The 
shockwave  set  off  the  PETN  at  the  fibre  tips 
producing a  flash. The distance into the  wedge at 
which the shockwave transitions into a detonation 
wave was determined based on the recorded times 
of  flashes  and  is  indicative  of  the  sensitivity  of 
explosive to initiation via shock. The slopes of the 
Comp B wedges were between 25-45.  
Fig. 2. A sketch of the wedge test utilising a plane 
The  new  composite  attenuator  consisted  of  a 
PMMA disk of various thicknesses attached to a 5 
mm  thick  disk  of  6061-T6  aluminium.  It  was 
expected  that  the  impedance  mismatch  between 
PMMA  and  aluminium  would  result 
reflection  of  a  part  of  the  waves  energy.  Thus  a 
shorter  PMMA  attenuator  would  be  used.  It  was 
thought  that  less  travel  distance  would  result  in 
less  temporal  dispersion  of  the  shockwave.  The 
earlier  experiments  showed  that  the  dispersed 
isotemporal.  It  was  reasoned  that  an  impedance 
mismatch  between  PMMA  and  aluminium  disks 
would  result  in  a  reduction  of  strength  of  the 
release wave. This in turn would result in a steplike  loading  pressure  profile  instead  of  a  peak 
which would  simplify  the  experiment7.  It  was 
hoped  that  the  aluminium  disk  would  act  as  a 
flying plate which would result in a greater spatial 
uniformity of the pressure pulse.  
The  experimental  results  for  planarity  when 
utilizing either a 5mm aluminium  attenuator or a 
complex attenuator consisting of a 10 mm PMMA 
and a 5 mm aluminium disk proved this inference. 
These results are presented in the later sections and 
compared against the modelling results. 
       A typical wedge test arrangement is shown in 
Fig. 3. The test consisted of a PWG and a shockattenuation  system.  The  first  version  of  this  test 
used  a  Comp  B  sample  manufactured  in  a  thin 
wedge  shape.  This  was  then  changed  into  a 
significantly wider truncated wedge shape height 
limited  at  30mm  see  Fig.  3  to  reduce  the 
Fig. 3. An assembly of a typical wedge test set-up 
including  an  aluminium  free  surface  flash-gap 
Ignition and Growth Model in LS-DYNA 
The Ignition and Growth Model IG model 
in LS-DYNA  was derived from the original work 
of  Lee  and  Tarver8  and  has  been  described  more 
fully in previous papers3 4 9.  
The  original  IG  model  was  calibrated 
against  detonation  velocity  versus  diameter 
experimental data for unconfined Comp B charges 
containing  Type  I  RDX10.  However  it  has  since 
been found that it predicted a faster travel time in 
the  run-to-detonation  than  observed  in  smallscale 
experiments.  Thus  some  of 
parameters  required  adjustment  to  yield  better 
agreement  with  the  experimental  results9.  In  this 
paper adopting the constants b x a b c d y e f 
z  Fmxig  FmxGr  and  FmnGr  provided  by  Urtiew  et 
al.11  the  ignition  I  the  first  and  second  reaction 
rates  G1  and  G2  were  to  be  derived  to  allow 
simulation of both the original detonation velocity 
and failure diameter data plus the shock initiation 
data.  The  experimental  passfail  diameters10  for 
unconfined  Comp  B  charges  containing  Type  I 
RDX  were  1010  mm.  The  simulations  with  the 
final IG model parameters listed in Table 1 were 
in excellent agreement predicting 1110 mm. 
Model Calibration against LSGT 
It  is  expected  that  the  above  IG  model 
describing  the  response  of  the  material  to  very 
high pressure stimuli can be applied to simulations 
of  material  response  at  lower  pressures  that  are 
still  sufficiently  high  so  as  to  result  in  initiation. 
To  test  this  extrapolation  the  model  was  used  to 
simulate Large Scale Gap tests LSGT as given in 
reference12.  In  these  simulations  the  set-up  EOS 
parameters  and  material  properties  for  Pentolite 
steel  cardboard  PMMA  and  the  surrounding  air 
were  used  so  as  to  best  replicate  the  UN  Series 
As no data could be found for the current inhouse  produced  PWG  system  configuration 
calibration curves have been developed for the two 
systems  to  provide  different  pressure  levels  as  a 
singlecomposite  attenuator 
thickness  see  Fig.  4. The  required  EOS  and 
material model for the two explosive components 
and EOS for the PMMA and the aluminium  were 
determined  by  the  most  accurate  reproduction  of 
the available calibrated data for various gap tests 
with the aim of selecting the most suitable material 
model and EOS for PMMA34.  
Interface Equation Solution  Impedance 
The  pressure  shown  in  Fig.  4  is  the  peak 
pressure in the attenuator on the wedge surface. To 
find  the  initial  peak  pressure  delivered  to  the 
wedge  Px  the  well  known  impedance  match 
method14  Fig.  5  was  applied  to  derive  the 
particle velocity ux in the explosive wedge Fig. 2 
using  the  measured  free  surface  velocity  uf.  The 
intersection  data  of  the  reflected  curve  and  the 
straight  linear  line  can  be  obtained  by  using  a 
MATLAB solver subroutine as shown in Fig. 6.
Fig. 4. Calibration curves for the two systems. 
Fig. 5. Impedance match method.  
It should be noted that the calculated particle 
velocities in PMMA using the free surface velocity 
method may be significantly smaller than the real 
values  particularly  for  shorter  PMMA  lengths15
and  errors  could  occur  when  estimating  particle 
velocity as half the measured free-surface velocity 
for soft material such as PMMA16. 
                                                               
PMMA Particle Velocity 
PMMA Particle Velocity 
ufmeasured free surface 
ufmeasured free surface 
Quartic Interface Equation 
Quartic Interface Equation 
Derived by    Px  Pb
Derived by    Px  Pb
Fig. 6. Interface equation solution procedure.
Table 1. Parameters for the Ignition and Growth of Reaction Model for Comp B 
Unreacted Equation of State and 
Constitutive Values11
Reacted Product Equation of State and CJ 
Reaction Rate Parameters for 3 Term Model  
PWG Wavefront Planarity 
to  accurately  reproduce 
Modelling has played an important role in the 
design  process  of  the  finally  produced  in-house 
plane  wave  generator.  This  has  been  achieved  by 
calibrating  material  models  and  equation  of  state 
difference  between  the  detonation  wave  front  as 
measured  by  the  OPT.  Fig.  7  shows  the  time  lag 
comparison  of  the  wave  arrival  between  the 
modelling  results  and  those  from  the  tests.  It  can 
be seen that the predicted results closely duplicate 
the experimental data. 
Output of Shock- Attenuation System 
To  evaluate  temporal  planarity  of  the  shock 
attenuation  system  a  series  tests  have  been 
conducted the results of which are shown in Figs. 
8  9  and  10.  Agreement  is  seen  to  be  excellent 
the  LS-DYNA  predictions  and 
experimental results not only at the surface of the 
attenuator but also at the 1 mm air gap. 
Fig. 7. Comparison of modelling and experiments 
for PWG wavefront planarity. 
Fig. 8. Comparison of modelling and experiments 
for 5 mm AL attenuation system.  
tests  have  been  simulated  as  a  one-dimensional 
flow.  However  as  indicated  by  Kooker17  queries 
about the transition event at low pressures can be 
addressed  by  2D  simulations.  The  new  ALE 
Arbitrary  Lagrange-Eulerian 
technique  in  LS-DYNA  has  been  used  in  the 
qualitative approaches and saving CPU time. This 
the  decomposition  of  a 
calculation into several steps which allows the use
of  highly  refined  meshes  in  the  domain  of  the 
explosive charge. The results are then mapped into 
another  model  2D  or  3D  with  different  mesh 
lengths or model size.  This approach offers many 
benefits  in  performing  explosives  studies  where 
initial detonation and the start of the propagation is 
essential  for  the  rest  of  calculation  but  which 
computationally  expensive  to  use  for  the  entire 
modelled  space. Using Mapping  to increase  mesh 
size leads to a very small percentage error between 
simulation  and  experimental 
require  a  mesh  size 
Fig. 9. Comparison of modelling and experiments 
for 10 mm PMMA  5 mm AL attenuation system. 
Fig. 10. Comparison of modelling and experiments 
for 40 mm PMMA  5 mm AL attenuation system. 
The IG model described earlier was used to 
simulate  the  wedge  tests.  Traditionally  wedge 
Fig.  11  shows  one  example  of  the  pressure 
contours  at  different  times  for  the  single  inert  40 
mm  PMMA  test  showing  the  evolution  of  the 
wave  in  the  wedge.    The  front  of  the  shockwave 
emerging from the PMMA attenuator is somewhat 
convex  however  the  curvature  was  taken  care  of 
by employing a satisfactory reactive burn model.  
Figs.  12  and  13  show  the  vertical  locations 
shock  wave  positions  versus  time  of  shock 
arrival  results  for  both  calculations  and  tests  for 
the  two  shock-attenuation  systems  single  inert 
PMMA  attenuator  and  dual  inert  materials  - 
PMMA attenuator plus 5 mm thick aluminium. It 
can  be  seen  that  the  current  models  faithfully 
predict  the  initiation  behaviour  for  both  shock 
attenuation  systems  particularly  the  reverse  slope 
changes  due  to  the  shock  decay  with  distance 
travelled  caused  by  lateral  rarefaction  waves 
indicating non-planar waves hitting the wedge.  
                                                              
              Fig. 11. Pressure contours at various times showing the evolution of the wave in the wedge.
inflection  point  by  fitting  two  polynomials  to  the 
data set. A second order polynomial  was used for 
the  run  up  region  and  a  first  order  polynomial 
linear  was  used  for  the  detonation  region.  The 
script  moved  through  the  dataset  using  each  data 
point and halfway between each data point as the 
two  polynomials.  The 
correlation strength of each set of fits was recorded 
and the highest correlation location was selected as 
the  transition  point.  Fig.  14  demonstrates  the 
approach utilising the test data of 40 mm PMMA  
5 mm Al attenuation system. 
The plot in Fig. 14 shows the velocity at each 
data  point  and  the  proceeding  points  with  two 
relatively  linear  sections  however  the  second 
section post transition is not at a constant velocity 
but is instead slowly decelerating. This may be due 
to  energy  losses  towards  the  tip  of  the  wedge. 
There appears to be a significant amount of noise 
around  the  transition  point  which  appears  to  be 
approximately  8-10  mm  if  the  two  data  points 
above  10  mms  are  ignored  as  outliers.  This  is 
very similar to the distance of 8.92 mm predicted 
in the LS-DYNA model.  
The  correlation  factor  plot  also  shows  two 
distinct peaks. This suggests that the assumption of 
a  quadratic  and  a  linear  regime  may  not  be 
accurate.  The  current  iteration  of  the  script  takes 
the highest correlation point as the transition point. 
Newer iterations will fit a curve to the correlation 
and  use  the  peak  of  the  curve  as  the  transition 
point  as  this  should  yield  a  more  accurate  result. 
Future  work  will  be  conducted  to  investigate 
fitting  more  complex  theoretical  models  to  the 
Pressure Time History Record 
Fig. 15 shows the pressure time history records 
of  a  series  of  monitoring  tracers  located  at 
positions corresponding to the optical fibres in the 
wedge test setup for the 40 mm PMMA  5 mm Al 
simulation.  Each  line  represents  an  individual 
tracer. They clearly demonstrate that the pressures 
in the wedge are continuously building leading up 
to  the  detonation.  The  run  to  detonation  distance 
can  be  estimated  by  the  pressure  approaching  the 
CJ pressure. For this example it can be seen that 
detonation  first  occurs  at  approximately  22.73  s 
Fig. 12. Locations-time records - both calculations 
and tests for the single inert PMMA attenuator.  
Fig. 13. Locations-time records - both calculations 
and tests for PMMA AL system. 
Simulated Run-to-Detonation Distance 
The  distance  which  the  non-reactive  shock 
wave  travels  into  the  explosive  prior  to  its 
transition  to  detonation  is  called  the  run-to18.  Different  approaches  for 
detonation  distance  xr
determining this distance have been investigated in 
detail  earlier34.  The  uncertainties  in  determining 
this  distance  indicated  the  need  to  apply  multiple 
approaches. A  few  examples  demonstrating  how 
some  of  these  approaches  work  are  presented  in 
the following section.  
Distance-time Record Method 
The  main  goal  of  the  data  analysis  was  to 
determine  the  inflection  point  at  which  the  shock 
through  the  explosive  wedge  transitioned  to  a 
detonation  wave.  In  the  past  this  was  done 
somewhat subjectively. It was decided that a more 
objective  solution  was  required.  A  MATLAB 
routine  was  written  that  attempted  to  locate  the 
giving  an  approximate  run  to  detonation  distance 
                                                               
Fig. 14. Results of 40 mm PMMA  5 mm AL attenuation system employing MATLAB script.  
Px for the  Comp B  were  found to be 1.04  mms 
respectively.  The  LS-DYNA 
predicting 1.04 mms and 9.36 GPa. According to 
the power law equation as given by Cooper18 the 
run distance xr was around 5.1 mm. 
The  final  simulated  run-to-detonation  distance 
applying  multiple  methods 
simultaneously are summarised in Fig. 16 in Popplot form together with reference lines Gibbs and 
Popolato1  Cooper18  Price19  and  Urtiew11  and  a 
law  relationship  between  shock 
pressure  and  run-to-detonation  distance  as  given 
where xr is in mm and P in GPa.  
                                     1 
It  can  be  seen  that  most  of  the  slopes  of 
straight lines on a log-log plot are almost identical 
furnishing  a  direct  comparison  of  the  relative 
shock  sensitivity  the  closer  to  the  line  is  to  the 
origin  of  the  plot  the  more  sensitive  is  the 
material11.  As  expected  current 
Composition B containing Type I RDX is the least 
Fig. 15. Pressure time history record.
Free Surface Velocity Method  
As  mentioned  earlier  free  surface  velocities 
were  measured  at  two  locations  on  the  attenuator 
surface. A simple linear extrapolation was used to 
work out the surface velocity at the centre. To test 
this extrapolation a detailed study establishing the 
correlations  of  surface  velocity  and  locations  is 
extrapolated  free  surface  velocities  and  following 
the  procedure  utilising  the  impedance  matching 
method  described  earlier 
configuration the particle velocity ux and pressure 
investigated.  Based  on 
the  time  distribution  across  the  detonation 
wave front as measured by OPT. 
Calibration curves were developed for the inhouse  produced  PWG  with  two  different 
different  pressure  levels  as  a  function  of  the 
singlecomposite attenuator thickness.  
The  current  wedge 
optimisation  of  both  the  shock-generating 
system and wedge sample shapes to study the 
successfully  conducted 
utilising modern instrumentation. The optical 
fibre  arrays  used  in  the  wedge  test  can 
provide  valuable  data  for  reactive  model 
Different  measurement  techniques  in  the 
experiments  and  various  approaches  for 
determining  the  run-distance-to-detonation 
were  described.  The  uncertainties 
obtaining  this  distance  indicated  the  need  to 
apply multiple methods simultaneously. 
The current IG model can faithfully predict 
initiation  behaviour  for  both  shock 
attenuation systems and accurately reproduce 
the  distance-time  records  measured  by  the 
optical  fibres  particularly  the  reverse  slope 
changes due to the shock decay with distance 
of travel caused by lateral rarefaction waves. 
It  is  planned  that  the  following  area  will  be 
considered for the future work 
Possible  experimental  techniques  will  be 
continuously  explored  to  obtain  reasonable 
data at lower pressure for the Pop Plot. 
 Work  will  be  conducted  in  the  ongoing 
including  developing  reactive 
models  and  JWL  EOS  for  both  un-reacted 
and  products  for  solid  explosives  using  free 
surface  velocity  measurement  on  explosive 
surfaces for obtaining shock Hugoniot. 
Effect of Temperature on Detonation Propagation in Composition B 
John D. Yeager Scott I. Jackson Mark Short 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos New Mexico USA 
Shock and Detonation Physics 
Abstract. Composition B is a melt-castable explosive consisting of RDX crystals in a TNT 
matrix. At elevated temperatures the TNT can flow or even melt which affects the particle 
distribution and therefore the detonation propagation. To study this phenomenon rate stick 
experiments were conducted at ambient conditions at temperatures below the TNT melt 
and  at  temperatures  above  the  TNT  melt.  We  fielded  shorting  pins  to  measure  the 
detonation velocity and a streak camera to record the detonation breakout. We report the 
measured velocities as a function of temperature and discuss the effect of temperature on 
detonation  propagation.  The  need  for  temperature-dependent  Composition  B  data  in 
detonation shock dynamics simulations is discussed.  
Composition  B  is  a  melt-castable  explosive 
trinitrotoluene TNT matrix. Various formulations 
of Composition B may also include up to 1 wax. 
Figure 1  shows  scanning  electron  micrographs  of 
the  Composition  B  with  and  without  preferential 
etching  of  the  TNT.  During  heating  or  meltcasting  the  RDX  particles  can  settle  as  the  TNT 
becomes molten and starts to flow. TNT melts at 
80C  but  Composition  B  transitions  from  stable 
solid to a slurry at 79C.1 This thermal instability 
can  result  in  anisotropic  detonation  properties  as 
the  RDX  particles  become  unevenly  distributed. 
This  is  expected  to  affect  shock  response  and 
initiation and growth within the material which in 
general  is  being  studied  elsewhere.2  3  However 
the RDX distribution effect is convolved with the 
difference in properties between solid and molten 
Fig. 1. Cut surface of Composition B-3 top and 
etched  surface  bottom. Large  crystals  are  RDX 
while the needle-like crystals are TNT. 
These  competing  effects  cause  difficulties  in 
both experimental and theoretical interpretation of 
elevated  temperature  behavior  of  Composition  B. 
Experimentally  solid-solid  phase  transitions  in 
high explosive HE and plastic-bonded explosive 
PBX  systems  can  affect  density  and  crystal 
additionally  affect  part  stability  i.e.  altering  the 
experimental  geometry  vapor  pressure  and 
chemical reaction rate.4-8 Corresponding effects on 
shock  and  detonation properties  are  either known 
or implied.8-10 Theoretical tools such as detonation 
shock dynamics DSD help interpret the effect of 
various  changes  to  a  material  on  the  detonation 
propagation.  Detonation  shock  velocity  Dn  vs. 
detonation  front  curvature    relationships  socalled  Dn      curves  can  be  generated  from  the 
measurements  during  a  rate  stick  experiment. 
These  relationships  are  important  for  calibrating 
shock  dynamics  models  because  they  are  an 
intrinsic  property  of  the  material  and  thus can  be 
used in configurations other than the measurement 
geometry.11 However precise data are needed for 
Here we attempt to experimentally isolate the 
effect  of  TNT  state  on  Composition  B-3  60 
RDX  40  TNT  no  wax  detonation  at  ambient 
temperature  and  slightly  above 
temperature. This specific formulation is easier to 
study  because  there  are  no  additional  influences 
from the wax flowing or melting with temperature. 
This  also  means  that  the  molten  material  is  more 
viscous and so the RDX will take longer to settle 
or  otherwise  segregate  at  temperature.  The  net 
effect  is  advantageous  for  heating  experiments 
where a single microstructural variable is expected 
to change i.e the TNT melts and ideally others do 
not  i.e.  RDX  movement  TNT  bubbling  or 
flowing  etc.  The  Composition  B-3  is  machined 
into pellets which are assembled into a rate stick 
and detonated at one end. The detonation velocity 
is  measured  with  shorting  pins  and  the  front 
curvature  of  the  detonation  is  measured  with  a 
Rate Stick Experimental Setup 
Rate sticks are explosive cylinders composed 
of  several  cylindrical  pellets  assembled  into  a 
column. Pellets are used for consistency of density 
throughout the assembly that is a single cylinder 
of  pressed  or  machined  HE  usually  will  have 
significant density variation between the center of 
the  cylinder  and  the  edges.  Generally  the  pellets 
are then bonded together with microns-thick layers 
of glue and aligned into a single column. Shorting 
pins  are  then  glued  along  the  cylinder  at  precise 
intervals. During the detonation the shorting pins 
will short once the insulating material between the 
two  halves  of  the  pin  circuit  is  destroyed  by  the 
detonation.  This  produces  a  signal  which  is 
recorded by an oscilloscope. Precise measurement 
of  the  inter-pin  spacing  and  the  shorting  signal 
allow  for  calculation  of  the  detonation  velocity. 
Detonation  breakout  is  measured  by  using  a 
transparent  window  with  a 
aluminum in a strip of similar width to the charge. 
The  aluminum-coated  side  is  then  pressed  into 
intimate contact with the end of the rate stick and 
held  with  set  screws.  An  argon  flash  lamp  is 
triggered  to  illuminate  the  aluminum  as  the 
detonation  progresses 
destroys the aluminum mirror. A streak camera is 
used to continuously record the reflected light as 
the  aluminum  is  destroyed  light  is  no  longer 
reflected to the camera. Thus a film record of the 
spatial  distribution  of  the  light  as  a  function  of 
time  will  yield  the  detonation  front  shape.  This 
diagnostic is described in more detail elsewhere 12. 
these  experiments  Composition  B-3 
formulated flakes were pressed into cylinders with 
dimensions  of  1-inch-diameter  by  2  inches  long. 
The  density  of  the  parts  was  measured  and  all 
cylinders  fell  in  the  range  of  1.7137    1.7245 
gcm3.  Seven  cylinders  were  used  per  rate  stick. 
polymethylmethacrylate  PMMA  window  with  a 
6-micron-thick  aluminum  mirror  coated  by  vapor 
in  our  HE  during 
In anticipation of the softening and melting of 
temperature experiments the use of glue or epoxy 
directly on the surface of the HE was avoided for 
the  entire  assembly.  Usually  epoxy  holds 1  the 
pellets together 2 the detonator onto the back of 
the  assembly  3  the  shorting  pins  in  place  and 
4 the window on the front of the assembly. Here 
detonation in the main charge was initiated by an 
RP-1 detonator Teledyne RISI Tracy CA USA 
which  was  held  in  intimate  contact  with  the 
Composition  B  by  a  spring-loaded  sub-assembly. 
The  HE  cylinders  were  encased  in  a  nylon  tube 
McMaster-Carr  Santa  Fe  Springs  CA  USA 
cylindrical  geometry 
with wall thickness of  inch. Nylon was chosen 
temperatures  and  because  it  was  sufficiently  stiff 
Composition B began to soften without being stiff 
enough to confine the detonation. The nylon tube 
was machined to provide a moderate slip fit to the 
Composition  B.  This  allowed  the  pellets  to  be 
secure  without  requiring  glue.  The  window  was 
held  in  place  with  set  screws.  The  entire  HE 
assembly  had  a  slight  net  compressive  stress 
applied    by  the  spring  and  detonator  in  order  to 
experiment.  Holes  were  drilled  in  the  nylon  to 
Stamford  CT  USA  in  between  Composition  B 
pellets and application of shorting pins Dynasen 
Goleta  CA  USA  to  the  HE  surface.  Figure  2 
shows a schematic and a photograph of one of the 
rate stick experiments used here. 
in  contact  during 
Fig. 2. Composition B-3 rate stick assembly with 
schematic  top  and  photograph  of  stick  inside  a 
heating apparatus bottom 
Results and Discussion 
Rate Sticks to Examine Temperature Effects 
rate  sticks  were  assembled  and 
successfully  fired  1  ambient  temperature  2 
70C and 3 85C. The melting point of TNT is 
80C  although  our  preliminary  Composition  B 
research has shown that the bulk formulation does 
not significantly flow at this temperature. Ideally 
these  experiments  thus  capture  and  differentiate 
the behavior of Composition B with hot solid TNT 
from that of Composition B with molten TNT.  
Figure  3  shows  the  shorting  pin  data  for  the 
ambient  test  plotting  the  time  the  oscilloscope 
received the signal from each pin the peaks in the 
voltage. The spacing between each pin is known 
and  so  the  velocity  is  calculated  with  a  simple 
linear  regression.  Figure  4  shows  a  partial  streak 
camera record from the ambient test.  
Fig. 3. Shorting pin signals plotted vs. time for the 
ambient  rate  stick  experiment.  Inset 
calculated detonation velocity. 
Fig.  4.  Streak  camera  record  of  detonation 
breakout  for  the  ambient  rate  stick  experiment 
stretched vertically for clarity. The bright region 
in  early  time  is  the  intact  mirror  so  the  darkness 
indicates destruction of the mirror. 
The  pin  data  for  the  ambient  test  gave  a 
measured  detonation  velocity  of  7.913    0.053  
mm  s. It compares quite well with the available 
literature.  The  closest  comparable 
Composition  B-3  at  2  diameter  with  slightly 
lower density than ours resulting in less than 1 
greater detonation velocity shown in Table 1.12  
tests  posed  several 
experimental challenges. The primary concern was 
the  functionality  of 
the  RP-1  detonators  at 
temperature. Preliminary heating tests showed that 
Composition B-3 reached the set point of the box 
the exterior of the nylon tube and particularly the 
detonator necessarily close to the wall of the box 
could  reach  much  higher  temperatures.  Testing 
showed  that  by  the  time  the  Composition  B-3 
reach 90C for example the detonator may have 
experienced temperatures of 115C or greater. The 
PETN  in  the detonator  should  decompose around 
128C but certain thermal effects could hinder the 
initiate  reliably  at 
temperatures  below 
the  decomposition  point. 
However we wished to continue to use the RP-1 
detonator  because  of  its  well-characterized  and 
reliable  detonation  behavior    specifically  the 
time  between  sending  the  electrical  signal  to 
explode  the  bridge  wire  and  the  explosive  output 
from  the  front  of  the  detonator  is  extremely 
reliable and repeatable. In order to continue using 
this detonator at higher temperatures we made two 
adjustments  to  the  preliminary  setup.  First  we 
custom-built  a  better  heating  box  with  several 
inches  of  thermal  insulation.  Heat  was  applied 
from  the  bottom  of  the  box  with  a  ceramic  fiber 
heating    plate  Watlow  St.  Louis  MO  USA 
rather than through the walls as before. Second we 
designed  a  simple  cooling  system 
detonator  through  which  we  ran  cold  tap  water. 
The cooling system is shown on a demo sample of 
a  detonator  inside  an  intentionally-opened  nylon 
tube for illustrative purposes Figure 5. Detonator 
evaluate the efficiency of the cooling system. The 
details  of  the  test  are  not  particularly  interesting 
but  the  net  result  was  that  the  detonator  never 
warmed  above  60C  even  when  the  internal  box 
temperature  was  115C  even  after  soaking  at 
temperature for several hours. 
tests  used  several 
Fig. 5. Setup for cooling experiments using RP-1 
detonators.  The  supply  side  of  the  coil  was 
insulated  and  cold  tap  water  was  run  through 
during heating of the box. 
temperature  experiments  were  conducted  at  70C 
and 85C. A summary of the data is given in Table 
1. The  key  finding  is  that  the  detonation velocity 
for  the  85C  shot  has  a  value  well  below  that  of 
the  70C  despite  a  relatively  small  increase  in 
temperature but also a much larger standard error. 
This indicates that the melting of the TNT affects 
the detonation propagation significantly.  
Table  1.  Reported  detonation  velocity  vs. 
temperature  for  Composition  B-3  with  standard 
Detonation Shock Dynamics Calibrations 
the  streak  camera  was 
developed  and  digitally  scanned  for  the  ambient 
and  85C  shots.  Unfortunately  the  streak  camera 
image  from  the  70C  shot  was  not  captured  and 
we plan to repeat the experiment in the future. 
Recall  that  the  streak  camera  is  continuously 
recording during the experiment meaning that the 
resulting  film  has  dimensions  of  length  vs.  time. 
The  breakout  coordinates  can  be  determined  by 
manually selecting points in the image or by using 
software routines which attempt to find the edge of 
an image by using discrete jumps in pixel values. 
Here ImageJ National Institutes of Health image 
processing  software  was  used  to  false-color  the 
grayscale  image  with  a  very  sensitive  color 
scheme then to select pixels across the image with 
the  appropriate  color.  The  x-time  coordinates  of 
the  breakout  on  the  film  were  converted  to  x-z 
coordinates by using the write speed of the camera 
and  the  resolution  of  the  scanner.  The  x-axis  is 
perpendicular to the detonation direction and the zaxis is along it. Figure 6 compares the detonation 
front  curvature  of  the  ambient  shot  to  the  85C 
measured  here  can  also  be  considered  a  crosssection  of  the  three-dimensional  front  due  to  the 
axial symmetry of the rate stick. The x-coordinates 
are then simply translated to radial r coordinates 
facilitating  analysis  of  the  relationship  between 
axial and radial propagation. 
The data is fit with the function used by Hill et 
al13 which was motivated by Bdzils earlier work14  
where an and  are fitting parameters and R is 
the measured charge radius. 
front  curvature  of 
Fig.  6.  The  detonation 
Composition B-3 at ambient and 85C. Data is fit 
with the function proposed by Bdzil.  
A  few  observations  on  the  data  are  readily 
apparent.  First  the  fit  to  the  ambient  data  is  of 
marginal quality near the core of the sample. The 
underlying  reason  for  this  is  currently  uncertain. 
Inspection  of  Fig.  6  shows  a  non-symmetric  data 
set about r0. The analytical function is symmetric 
about r0 and so the marginal quality of fit is due 
to  this  variability  in  the  detonation  front  itself. 
Material  variability  is  a  possible  explanation  for 
the  non-uniform  detonation 
explanation could be light transmission issues with 
the window or film capture with the streak camera. 
Whatever  the  reason  this  experiment  should  be 
repeated to validate the findings. Second the edge 
effects  of  the  heated  Composition  B-3  are  much 
more dramatic than at ambient conditions and the 
edge angle inferred from the fit is very low for a 
polymer-confined  explosive.  The  curvature  at  the 
front is more significant at 85C but the curvature 
near the edges is more significant at ambient.  
Once a physical description of the detonation 
front was obtained the breakout shape was fitted 
with Equation 1 with parameters given in Table 2. 
Also given is the edge angle  which describes the 
angle between the detonation front at the edge and 
the shock wave traveling through the surrounding 
material e.g. nylon.   
Table 2. Fitting parameters for detonation fronts 
The  normal  detonation  velocity  Dn  is  a 
function  of  the  detonation  velocity  measured  by 
the  pins  D0  and  the  local  angle  between  the 
principal axis and the front normal. The curvature 
 is a function of the slope of the breakout and the 
derivative of the slope. The Dn  r curve and Dn  
 curve for the ambient temperature Composition 
B shot is given in Figure 7. 
The front curvature calculations reinforce the 
observations from the raw data where more of the 
curvature  in  the  ambient  case  occurs  near  the 
edges  while  the  curvature  in  the  heated  case  is 
more  balanced  but  much  higher  overall.  This 
indicates that the inert confiner is less important to 
the detonation dynamics at 85C and also that the 
explosive becomes more non-ideal at 85C.  
We note that this is somewhat unanticipated in 
comparison  to  the  limited  data  on  heated  rate 
sticks  in  plastic-bonded  explosives  PBX.  For 
example  Hill  et  al  studied 
temperature  on  PBX  9502  and 
slightly  decreased  as 
increased.13  This  is  generally  attributed  to  a 
corresponding  decrease  in  the  reaction  zone  size. 
In that case the measured detonation velocity did 
not significantly change with temperature but the 
principal  difference  between  any  heated  PBX 
experiment  and  ours  is  that  our  matrix  material 
TNT is molten at the temperature of interest. The 
physical  state  of  the  TNT  would  be  expected  to 
affect all manner of properties e.g. modulus shear 
likely  correspondingly  affects 
detonation properties. For example Mader reports 
the  detonation  velocity  of  TNT  decreases  from 
6.950  mms  to  6.580  mms  upon  melting.9 
Extension of this type of study to Composition B-3 
will be the subject of future investigations. 
The  associated  error  of  the  measurement 
however is large. The TNT melt certainly appears 
to significantly shift the Dn   relationship from 
the ambient condition.   
Due  to  the  large  detonation  velocity  and       
Dn   changes observed additional experimental 
testing  will  be  required  to  better  understand  the 
relative  importance  of  the  thermal  expansion  and 
melt  phenomena  on  the  detonation  dynamics  of 
The  authors  wish  to  thank  C.  Chiquete 
LANL for some of the DSD analysis and figures. 
S. Vincent T. Pierce T. Tucker T. Kuiper and E. 
Anderson  are  also  thanked  for  assistance  with 
firing  site  operations  and  temperature  control  of JCZS2i An Improved JCZ Database for EOS Calculations at High Temperature and Pressure 
Michael L. Hobbs Aaron L. Brundage and Cole D. Yarrington 
Engineering Sciences Center 
Sandia National Laboratories Albuquerque NM 87185 
Integrated Military Systems 
Sandia National Laboratories Albuquerque NM 87185 
Abstract. The Jacobs-Cowperthwaite-Zwisler-Sandia JCZS database1 has been used for 
over 15 years with the JCZ32 equation of state EOS to calculate detonation properties 
and product shock Hugoniots for a variety of explosives. The scope of the JCZS database 
has been increased by including species and ions that are currently used in the National 
Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration  NASA  Lewis  Research  Centers  computer 
program CEA3 Chemical Equilibrium with Applications. CEA uses an ideal gas EOS as 
opposed to a real gas EOS valid at high pressure andor densities such as the JCZ3-EOS 
that uses intermolecular potentials. We have also included piecewise fits for specific heat 
capacities Cp to insure reasonable extrapolations to temperatures as high as 20000 K. 
The  new  library  with  the  piecewise  Cp  fits  and  exponential  6  parameters  have  been 
implemented  into  the  CTH-TIGER  equilibrium  code.  The  CTH-TIGER  code  is  a 
chemical equilibrium solver45 coupled to our shock physics code CTH. Predictions in the 
current work include detonation velocity for 59 explosives water and air properties and 
composition of an air shock created by detonation of Comp-B 60 RDX and 40 TNT. 
Background and History 
ideal  gas  EOS  since 
temperatures  are  high  pressures  are  low  and  the 
detonation  products  are  far  enough  apart  that 
However  condensed-phase  explosives  produce 
higher pressures and require an EOS that accounts 
for intermolecular attraction and repulsion such as 
Figure 1 shows a brief history of some of the 
thermochemical codes and equations of state used 
to  calculate  detonation  properties  for  condensed 
explosives  at  our  laboratory.  In  the  1950s  the 
Lawrence  Radiation  Laboratory 
Livermore  California  used  the  RUBY  code  to 
calculate  detonation  properties.  The  Los  Alamos 
Scientific  Laboratory  LASL  used  the  BKW 
program  to  do  similar  calculations.  Both  the 
RUBY  and  BKW6  codes  were  complex  with  the 
EOS  mixed  intimately  with  the  thermodynamic 
and hydrodynamic calculations within the code.  
In  the  1960s  Stanford  Research  Institute 
SRI developed the TIGER code45 with a goal to 
simplify  the  detonation  calculations  by  using 
modular  subroutines 
thermodynamics  and  the  EOS.  In  the  1970s 
Cowperthwaite and Zwisler5 put the JCZ EOS into 
TIGER  giving  the  code  EOS  options  for  ideal 
BKW  and  JCZ.  Only  12  gases  consisting  of 
carbon  C  hydrogen  H  oxygen  O  nitrogen 
N and aluminum Al had JCZ parameters. 
aLawrence Radiation Laboratory LRL
bLos Alamos Scientific Laboratory LASL
cStanford Research Institute SRI
dSandia National Laboratories SNL
eLawrence Livermore National Laboratory LLNL
Fig. 1. Brief history of SNLs EOS work17 based on SRIs original TIGER code.45 
The  original  TIGER  code4  could  consider  up 
to  30  gas  species  and  10  condensed  products 
composed of up to 10 elements although the code 
was typically only used for reactants containing C 
H  N  O  and  Al.  In  the  1990s  these  restrictions 
were  eliminated  when  Hobbs  et  al.  created  the 
BKWS7  and  JCZS1  EOS  databases  which 
considered  56  elements  747  gases  and  401 
condensed  products.  BKW 
parameters  for  an  exponential-6  intermolecular 
potential were determined for all of these gases.  
In  1994  Fried8  converted  our  laboratories 
version of TIGER with the BKWS database to the 
computer  language  C  and  added  a  graphical  user 
interface GUI. Fried et al.9 also created a BKW 
parameterization  called 
the  BKWC  database 
which  was  limited  in  scope  since  it  lacked 
important  species  such  as  dissociated  hydrogen 
H.  Fried  et  al.10  created  a  more  useful  EOS 
database referred to as the EXP6 EOS. The EXP6 
database  contains  many  of  the  same  potential 
parameters  as  the  JCZS  database  but  is  not  as 
accurate  as  the  JCZS  database  when  calculating 
detonation properties.10 
Problems with JCZS database occur when the 
temperature  exceeds  6000  K.  The  specific  heats 
for  the  JCZS  databases  were  fit  to  polynomials 
using  data  from  the  JANAF  tables11  which  were 
typically good to 6000 K for the gases and 1500 
K for the condensed products. The condensed Cps 
were extrapolated to 6000 K with a monotonically 
increasing  polynomial.  Above  6000  K  the  Cp 
extrapolations  are  not  good  and  sometimes 
decrease with temperature even going negative as 
shown in Fig. 2 for C CO and CO2. The Cp fits for 
these gases used in the NASA-CEA3 code are also 
Fig. 2. Cp fits for JCZS and JCZS2i databases. 
Temperatures  in  shocks  can  easily  exceed 
10000  K.  For  example  the  air  shock  produced 
Equation  3  can  be  solved  by  substituting  the 
specific  heats  from  1  and  2  into  3.  The 
integration constants can be obtained by assuming 
that  the  enthalpy  and  entropy  at  the  reference 
temperature  298.15  K  is  equal  to  the  heat  of 
  and  entropy  of  formation  at 
o   respectively.  The  dimensionless 
dimensionless entropy and enthalpy 
   RT  h  RT  S  R . 
insure  extrapolations  are 
reasonable  without  having  the  problems  such  as 
negative  heat  capacities  as  shown  in  Fig.  2. 
JCZS2i  specific  heats  are  extrapolated  to  high 
temperatures linearly using the specific heat at the 
highest  known  temperature  and  the  following 
value of the dimensionless specific heat at 106 K 
depending  on  the  number  of  atoms  N  in  the 
All  of  our  Cp  fits  were  plotted  to  20000  K  by 
Miller et al.12 to insure reasonable extrapolations.  
Condensed Water EOS 
We have implemented the following equation 
of state for solid and liquid water. 
V  A BT  CPexp 1 P  D
where A B C and D are 19.03 0.002 -0.00018 
7000 for ice and 15.7 0.008 -0.000318 and 7000 
for  liquid  water  respectively.  The  molar  volume 
for ice and liquid water  at 1 atm using Eq. 5 is 
shown in Fig. 3.a with data.13  
Figures  3.b-f  show 
the  calculated  and 
measured11  specific  heat  water  shock  Hugoniot 
with data1415 with the universal liquid Hugoniot16 
water sound speed with data17 pressure dependent 
melting point of solid water with data13 and the 
during open-air detonation of Comp-B can exceed 
10000 K. To simulate such phenomena using our 
shock  physics  code  CTH  we  have  coupled  our 
version of the TIGER code to CTH. The coupled 
code will be referred to as CTH-TIGER. 
The  primary  objective  of  the  current  work  is 
to  describe  a  new  EOS  library  which  we  have 
called the JCZS2i database. The database acronym 
retains  the  same  JCZS  as  in  reference  1  the  2 
refers  to  version  2  of  that  database  and  the  i 
refers  to  ions  in  the  database.  This  database 
the  EOS  parameters  such  as  BKW 
covolumes and JCZ potential parameters. 
the  monoatomic  diatomic 
The  new  database  uses  the  same  piecewise 
specific heat fits as the NASA-CEC code3 with all 
polyatomic specific heat fits accurate to 20000 K. 
We have also included a new condensed EOS for 
solid  and  liquid  water.  The  new  database  can  be 
used  to  successfully  reproduce  the  water  phase 
diagram and considers ice liquid water and water 
vapor. We also 1 compare the JCZS2i predictions 
to the JCZS1 and EXP610 predictions of detonation 
properties  for  59  explosives  2  compare  JCZS2i 
predictions of rarefied air composition at 0.01 atm 
from  2000  to  16000  K  with  the  NASA-CEC3 
code  and  3  predict  the  composition  of  an  air 
shock produced by detonating a 5 inch 12.7 cm 
radius cylinder of Comp-B in air. 
Piecewise Thermodynamic Properties 
The  JCZS2i  database  contains  coefficients 
that  can  be  used  to  determine  the  dimensionless 
specific heat at 1 bar from about 100 K to 20000 
K. We use two temperature-dependent polynomial 
functions to calculate the specific heat and refer to 
them  as  the  NASA  and  TIGER  polynomials. 
The two specific heat functions are 
R  a1T 2  a2T 1  a3  a4T  a5T 2  a6T 3  a7T 4  
R  C1  C2 C32  C43  C51  C62  C73   
where    TK 1000 .  The entropy and enthalpy 
at  1  bar  can  be  obtained  as  a  function  of 
temperature with the following two equations 
oolfolk et al. 197316
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Fig. 3. Water a EOS b specific heat c Hugoniot d sound speed e melting temperature and f phase 
diagram calculated with the JCZS2i database and compared to data from various sources. 
the  explosives  have  measured 
detonation  velocities  at  several  different  initial 
densities. For example the measured and predicted 
detonation  velocity  for  HMX  RDX  PETN  and 
TNT  are  shown  in  Fig.  5  for  several  densities. 
These predictions are similar to JCZS predictions.  
Air at High Temperatures and Pressures 
Figure 6 shows the composition of rarefied air 
at  0.01  atm  and  temperatures  ranging  from  2000 
K to 16000 K. Figure 6.a shows a prediction from 
Vincenti  and  Kruger19  based  on  work  in  the 
1950s.  Figure  6.b  shows  predictions  from  both 
the CTH-TIGER using the JCZS2i database and a 
prediction  from  the  NASA-CEC  code  using  the 
ideal gas EOS. Both the NASA code and the CTHTIGER  code  give  the  same  results  at  these  low 
pressures and high temperatures. 
water  phase  diagram  calculated  using  CTHTIGER  with  the  JCZS2i  database.  Currently 
CHEETAHs  EXP6-EOS10  does  not  consider 
liquid water and expansion states are suspect. The 
addition  of  the  JCZS2i  water  EOS  will  make 
expansion calculations more accurate. 
Detonation Velocity Calculations 
The  detonation  state  calculations  with  the 
JCZS2i  database  are  essentially  the  same  as  the 
JCZS database since intermolecular parameters are 
detonation  temperatures  are  similar.  The  addition 
of  ions  to  the  database  does  not  change  the 
calculations  significantly  since  dissociation  and 
ion  formation  takes  place  at  temperatures  higher 
than typical detonation temperatures. 
the  specific  heats  at 
Figure  4  shows  a  plot  of  measured  versus 
calculated  detonation  velocities  for  59  different 
explosives which are listed in Table 1. These are 
the  same  explosives  tested  by  Hobbs  and  Baer.18 
Common  acronyms  are  given  for  the  explosive 
with  additional  detail  such  as  heat  of  formation 
in  Ref.  18.  Predicted  detonation 
velocities from three databases are given in Table 
1 1 JCZS1 database 2 JCZS2i database and the 
3 EXP610 database.  
Measured Detonation Velocity kms
M  versus  predicted 
detonation velocity for explosives in Table 1. 
Fig. 5. Detonation velocities as a function of initial 
density  for  a  HMX  b  RDX  c  PETN  and  d 
TNT. Experimental velocities are listed in Table 1. 
Table 1. Measured and predicted detonation velocities with explosives from Ref. 18. 
aMean absolute error MAE is defined in the inset equation in Fig. 4. 
bRoot mean squared RMS error is defined in the inset equation in Fig. 4. 
The equilibrium compositions in Figs. 6.a and 6.b 
are similar up to 6000 K and depart significantly 
at  higher  temperatures.  The  JCZS2i  and  NASA 
predictions  use  newer  specific  heat  fits  that  are 
accurate  to  20000  K.  The  specific  heats  were 
calculated  from  molecular  constant  data  using 
ideal gas partition functions.20 The ideal gas EOS 
is appropriate for rarefied air at high temperatures. 
-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2
Colored lines TIGER-JCZS2i Dashed lines NASA-CEA-Ideal
10000 12000 14000 16000
Colored lines TIGER-JCZS2i
Dashed lines NASA-CEA-Ideal
10000 12000 14000 16000
Fig.  6  Rarefied  air  at  0.01  atm  from  a  Vincenti 
and  Kruger19  and  b  calculated  with  improved  Cp 
fits20  using  both  the  JCZS2i  database  and  the 
Figure 7 shows the effect of high pressure on 
the  gas  compressibility  and  the  equilibrium  air 
composition at 100000 atm. We have assumed the 
Debye-Hckel  effect  to  be  negligible  for  the 
JCZS2i  calculations.  The  Debye-Hckel  effect 
accounts  for  interaction  energy  of  the  ions.  This 
assumption is justified as shown in the inset plot in 
Fig.  7.A.  The  inset  plot  shows  Hilsenrath  and 
Kleins21  calculation  of  the  Debye-Hckel  effect. 
Even at 15000 K the change in compressibility is 
only  0.1.  However  real-gas  effects  are  more 
significant at low temperatures and high pressures. 
10000 12000 14000 16000
Fig.  7.  The  a  compressibility  and  b  equilibrium 
gas composition of air at 100000 atm. The inset21 
shows the Debye-Hckel effect to be negligible. 
Air Shock from Comp-B Detonation 
CTH-TIGER  has  the  unique  capability  to 
thermodynamic  properties 
accurately  calculate 
from the detonation state to hot ionized air states. 
As an example Fig. 8 illustrates various profiles 8s after initiating a 5-cm radius cylinder of CompB  in  the  center.  We  used  a  program  burn  model 
with  the  EOS  of  the  reaction  products  calculated 
using the JCZS database and fit to a JWL-EOS for 
use in the hydrocode. The ambient air composition 
was chosen to be the same as the air composition 
in Figs. 6 and 7  78.08 N2 20.95 O2 0.93 
the  vapor  dome.  The 
predictions  of  these  water  properties  were  within 
experimental error.  
The  JCZS2i  database  is  expected  to  give 
accurate results during expansions to low pressure 
when  liquid  water  is  formed.  Although  the  JCZS 
database includes liquid water the specific heat for 
the  older  database  does  not  match  measured 
specific heat. The EXP6 database does not include 
liquid water as a product. 
The  JCZS2i  EOS  database  was  used  to 
calculate  detonation  velocity  for  59  explosives  at 
various  densities.  The  predicted  velocities  were 
similar  to  the  JCZS1  database  predictions  which 
have the same intermolecular potential parameters 
and  the  similar  specific  heat  up  to  detonation 
temperatures.  Detonation  velocity  calculations 
were  also  compared  to  the  EXP6  EOS  database. 
The  mean  absolute  error  for  the  JCZS  JCZS2i 
and  EXP6  databases  were  1.76  1.73  and 
1.90  respectively.  We  consider  these  errors  to 
be the same order as the experimental error. 
The  JCZS2i  EOS  database  was  used  to 
calculate  the  equilibrium  composition  of  rarefied 
air  as  well  as  air  at  100000  atms.  These  results 
were  compared  to  calculations  performed  by  the 
National  Bureau  of  Standards19  in  the  1950s  as 
well  as  more  recent  predictions  by  the  NASA  
CEA3 code using improve specific heat fits.20 The 
JCZS2i  predictions  were  identical  to  the  newer 
NASA-CEA  predictions  since  this  database  uses 
the  same  specific  heats.  Calculations  of  highpressure air show the importance of including realgas  thermodynamics  e.g.  compressibility  at  high 
The  equilibrium  composition  of  an  air  shock 
produced  by  detonating  Comp-B  in  air  was 
calculated  with  CTH-TIGER.  The  air  shock  was 
1.4 mm thick and was over 10000 K. The shock 
was composed primarily of N2 N O NO Ar O2 
e-  NO  N  and  CO.  The  JCZS2i  EOS  database 
ion  concentrations  at  high 
temperatures and pressures. 
the  new  capability 
laboratory  operated  by  Sandia 
Corporation a Lockheed Martin Company for the 
Ar 0.033 CO2 and 0.003 Ne. Figure 8 shows 
that the air shock exceeds 10000 K. In the 1.4 mm 
wide  air  shock  nitrogen  dissociates  to  form 
significant  amounts  of  the  nitrogen  radical.  The 
temperature  is  hot  enough  to  strip  electrons  from 
the nitrogen radical to form positive nitrogen ions. 
Significant  amounts  of  NO  and  NO  are  also 
formed in the air shock.  
Fig.  8.  Comp-B  detonation  in  air  with  profiles  of 
composition and c the air shock composition. 
Summary and Conclusions 
The  JCZS-EOS  database  was  improved  by 
incorporating  piecewise  specific  heat  fits  of 
NASAs  latest  specific  heat  parameters.  The  new 
EOS database referred to as the JCZS2i database 
also considers over 200 ionic species as well as a 
new condensed water equation of state.  
The  JCZS2i  database  was  used  to  calculate 
various  properties  of  water  1 
dependent  molar  volume  of  condensed  water  2 
shock  Hugoniot  3  sound  speed  4  pressure 
dependent  melting  point  and  5  a  simple  phase 
Internal  document  number 
U.S.  Department  of  Energys  National  Nuclear 
Security Administration under Contract DE-AC0494AL85000. 
SAND2014-15321C. We thank Robert G. Schmitt 
and David Crawford for implementing TIGER into 
CTH  David  Miller  and  Justin  Schoof  for  plot 
support  Mel  Baer  for  discussions  regarding  ion 
implementation Stephen Attaway and Lydia Boye 
for  LDRD  support  and  Anthony  Geller  for 
management support.  
Formation of Carbon Nets in Detonation Products of High Explosives 
E.R. Pruuel cid39cid17cid44cid17cid3cid46cid68cid85cid83cid82cid89 and N.P. Satonkina 
Lavrentyev Institute of Hydrodynamics SB RAS Lavrentyev av. 15  
630090 Novosibirsk Russia 
 Novosibirsk State University 630090 Novosibirsk Russia 
Abstract. The condensation process of free carbon in the detonation products DP of carbon-rich high 
explosives  was studied  using the  molecular dynamics  method. It  was  shown that if the carbon volume 
fraction is high enough the carbon clusters form the net spatial structures of mesoscopic sizes bridging the 
opposite sides of the simulation region. The conductivity of DP was calculated considering the carbon nets 
as main conductors.  
Many  explosives  such  as  RDX  cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine  or  hexogen  HMX  cyclotetramethylenetetranitramine  or  octogen  PETN 
tetranitrate  TNT  trinitrotoluene  contain  carbon  in 
excess.  The  carbon  condensation 
macrocharacteristics of the detonation products DP. For 
example  the  part  of  the  energy  release  due  to  carbon 
condensation at the detonation of explosives such as TNT 
and  triaminotrinitrobenzol  is  from  10  to  30  percent 
depending on the theory used that should be taken into 
account at composing the equations of state of explosives 
condensed carbon in the DP can be up to 20 percent. B. 
Hayes 1 2  was the  first  who supposed the correlation 
between the free carbon fraction in DP at the Chapman  
Jouguet plane and the DP conductivity 1967 but there 
was  no  convincing  evidence  of  the  exclusive  role  of 
carbon in the DP conductivity of high explosives.  
inert  substances.  The  weight  fraction  of 
He had put forward the idea of condensation of the 
free carbon to the connected spatial nets that serve as the 
conducting  wires.  This  idea  can  explain  the  extremally 
high  conductivity  of  the  high  explosives  with  the  large 
fraction of free carbon.  
We performed the molecular dynamic simulations of 
the condensation of the carbon atoms in the DP using a 
simple model of the DP. The possibility of formation of 
carbon nets in the DP was confirmed. The calculations of 
the conduction of these nets are in a good agreement with 
the measurements of the conductivity of the DP.  
Molecular dynamics simulations 
The  main  question  we  are  going  to  clear  up  in  this 
study is how much carbon is needed to form a conductive 
structure in the DP of solid explosives. So we do not need 
a  highly  detailed  model  of  the  DP  including  carbon 
atoms. Thus we do not take into account fine features of 
chemical  interactions.  The  simplest  model  which  can 
answer  the  question  includes  two  sorts  of  particles 
interacting in some simple way. The particles of the sort 
C represented the atoms of free carbon whereas the P-sort 
particles  were  the  other  detonation  products.  Thus  the 
molecular dynamics of the ensemble consisting of these 
two  sorts  of  the  particles  atoms  was  studied.  Pair 
interactions  between  particles  of  the  same  sort  and 
between  particles  of  different  sorts  were  simulated  with 
the Lennard-Jones potential 
All  the  atoms  had  the  same  mass  of  20  atomic 
mass  units  that  approximately  corresponded  to  the 
average  weight  of  DP  molecule.  The  parameters  of  the 
Lennard-Jones potential for different pairs of atoms were 
The value of  b  characterizing the atom size was assumed 
The value of the parameter 
 was taken so that to 
obtain  the  reasonable  agreement  between  parameters  of 
the  melting  point 
calculations  and  the  experimental  data  for  carbon.  All 
other  parameters  that  characterize  mainly  the  DP  were 
temperature and the density to the reasonable parameters 
behind the detonation wave 
the  calculated  pressure 
MD-calculations  were  performed  in  the  region  of 
size  20  nm  x  20  nm  x  20  nm.  The  total  number  of 
particles  was  512000.  The  simulations  started  from  the 
initial  state  with the  fixed temperature and pressure and 
the approximately homogeneous distribution of the atoms 
in  the  region.  The  simulations  were  carried  out  for  the 
values of the volume fraction of the carbon atoms from 2 
to 40 percent. The carbon atoms aggregated to the dense 
particles with sizes of the several atomic diameters in all 
the  cases.  At  such  conditions  small  particles  coalesce 
into  a  large  particle  of  the  size  about  23  nm  and  lose 
their individuality. The large particles are also combined 
together but without loss of the individuality Fig.1.We 
can consider the large particles of size of 
more  to  be  mechanically  strong.  They  are  found  in  the 
DP retained after explosion.  
of the DP bend and break the branches of the cluster that 
restricts its final size. In the other case the clusters make 
contact and form the conducting net. The typical carbon 
net obtained in simulation is shown in Fig. 2. The DP in 
the nearest part of the Fig. 2 are not displayed in order to 
represent the structure of the carbon net clearly.  
Fig. 3 shows a micrograph of the solid residue after 
the explosion of the mixture of 50 percent TNT with 50 
percent  RDX  consisting  mainly  of  carbon.  The 
micrograph  was  obtained  with  the  JEOL  JEM  2012 
training  transmission  electron  microscope.  One  can  see 
that  carbon  particles  combined  with  the  formation  of  a 
spatially complex structure. Thus the results of the MD 
in  a  qualitative  agreement  with 
experimentally observed carbon structures.  
Fig.1.  Multiscale  model  of  carbon  condensation  from 
particles to mesoscale nets.  
Fig.  2.  Carbon  condensation  in  the  DP.  The  results  of 
simulation.  The  light  balls  are  the  DP  molecules.  The 
dark  balls  are  the  carbon  atoms  the  volume  fraction  of 
the  carbon  atoms  was  10  percent.  Only  the  carbon 
component is shown in the part of the simulation region 
The carbon particles formed in the DP aggregate to 
sparse  clusters  with  the  large  volume  of  pores  between 
particles.  Combining  with  their  neighbors  the  clusters 
grow in the sizes. The process is completed with one of 
two  possible  states  depending  on  the  cluster  size.  If  the 
size of the cluster is large enough the fluctuating forces 
Fig. 3. Carbon condensation in the DP.   
The conductivity of the carbon nets obtained in 
the MD simulations was also calculated.  
Analysis of experimental data 
The experimental data about the conductivity of the 
DP products of the explosive with various carbon content 
at  the  Chapman    Jouguet  plane  are  required  to 
understand the role of carbon in the DP conduction. We 
have  analyzed  the  data  on  the  conductivity  of  high 
explosives  with  various  carbon  content  such  as  RDX 
HMX PETN 3 4 compacted TNT of maximal density 
5 bulk TNT and bulk TNT with water 6. 
The content of free carbon in the DP was evaluated 
using the data of the calculation of the DP composition at 
the Chapman - Jouguet plane 7.  
Fig. 4 shows the data on conductivity of a series of 
high explosives as well as their mixtures. The calculation 
of  the  free  carbon  fraction  7  shows  that  all  these 
explosives release a significant quantity of free carbon to 
the moment when the state of the substance corresponds 
to the Chapman  Jouguet plane. The fraction of the free 
carbon atoms varied from 0.016 for bulk PETN PETN 
1.1  Fig.  4  to  0.3  for  the  compacted  TNT  of  maximal 
density  TNT  1.6  Fig.  4.  The  data  on  the  measured 
conductivity of the DP are shown as the intervals in Fig. 
4. The upper end of the each segment shows the maximal 
value of the conductivity within the von Neumann peak 
and the lower one corresponds to the conductivity value 
at the Chapman  Jouguet plane. We showed such a wide 
range of the conductivity values since the carbon net can 
arise develop and break in this region of the detonation 
wave.  The  number  to  the  right  of  the  data  intervals 
represents the initial explosive density.    
the  maximal  values  of 
The free carbon fraction and the conductivity of the 
DP of a pure TNT measured in the experiments increase 
with the density. The maximal conductivity of 100 Ohm1cm-1  was  observed  at 
the  maximal  density  for  
compacted TNT TNT 1.6. The conductivity decreased 
dramatically  with  the  decrease  of  the  density.  The 
conductivity  plotted  at  the  Fig.  4  was  observed  at  the 
density 0.95 gcm3 and is equal to 25 Ohm-1cm-1 TNT 
decreases  by  the  factor  40  with  the  density  decrease  by 
about 40 percent. This suggests to the existence of some 
non-ionic mechanisms of conduction. The data TNT 1.6 
cast  corresponds  to  the  cast  TNT.  The  differences 
compacted  TNT  are  explained  usually  by  the  some 
features of the detonation process.  
the  conductivity  values  for 
The  results  for  the  mixture  of  TNT  with  the 
chemically inactive component water are shown in the 
Fig. 4 with designation tnt 1.15  H2O. The magnitude 
of  the  registered  signal  increases  twice  in  comparison 
with  the  pure TNT  of  the  bulk  density.  Since  the  water 
conductivity is about 0.1 Ohm-1cm-1 8 at the pressures 
specific to detonation this conductivity increase can not 
be  explained  with  the  increase  of  the  quantity  of  the 
charge carriers supplied from water.  
We  concluded  that  water  filled  the  volume  free  of 
explosive that resulted in the compactness of the DP. To 
represent these data with the point on the plot correctly 
we recalculate the free carbon fraction. The experimental 
density  of  the  TNT  in  its  mixture  with  water  was  1.15 
gcm3  and  water  filled  the  pores. The  estimation  of  the 
volume  fraction  filled  with  the  carbon  atoms  in  the 
mixture of TNT with water was 0.08. The Tait equation 
for  water  was  applied  to  calculate  the  water  fraction  in 
the DP. Then the  volume  fraction filled  with the  DP of 
TNT is 0.82. The value of the conductivity of 23 Ohm1cm-1 was measured at the experiment. We recalculated 
this  value  to  the  conductivity  of  a  pure  TNT  excluding 
water and obtained 32 Ohm-1cm-1. At the fixed volume 
the  density  of  TNT  was   
approximation of the data from 9 leads to the value of 
4.8 of carbon atoms released in a free chemical form per 
molecule of TNT that is the volume fraction of the free 
carbon was 4.821  0.23.  
Fig.4. Electrical conductivity  of detonation products. 1   electrical conductivity of carbon nets simulated using MD 2  
percolation  model    points  are  the  experimental  data  for  different  HE  the  corresponding  values  of  the  density  are 
shown near each point.  
The  data  for  the  compacted  mixture  of  TNT  and 
RDX are marked with TNT 60RDX 40 in  the Fig. 4. 
The DP of TNT are diluted with the more powerful RDX 
having  lower  conductivity.  Thus  the  DP  of  TNT  were 
compressed  with  the  DP  of  RDX  that  increased  the 
pressure in the DP of TNT and changed the quantity of 
the  chemically  free  carbon.  In  this  case  the  volume 
fraction  of  free  carbon  and  the  conductivity  were 
recalculated with the method described above.  
We  should  distinguish  between  two  regions  at  the 
plot  in  the  Fig.  4  that  differ  with  the  conduction 
mechanism.  The  first  one  includes  the  data  for  the 
explosives containing TNT and another one includes all 
The  conductivity  of  the  explosives  with  balanced 
chemical composition the volume fraction of free carbon 
is lower than 8 percent is significantly smaller than that 
with a large fraction of free carbon. The conductivity of 
the  explosives  with  the  carbon  fraction  less  than  8 
percent corresponds approximately to the conductivity of 
TNT with the carbon fraction about 20 percent. However 
the thermodynamic parameters of TNT in the detonation 
wave are significantly lower than the parameters of that 
explosives  and  none  of  the  other  mechanisms  without 
using  the  conductivity  of  the  carbon  nets  can  explain 
such high conduction of the TNT.  
Condensation of carbon atoms to clusters and spatial 
nets  in  the  detonation  products  was  simulated  using 
molecular  dynamics  method.  It  was  shown  that  the 
fraction of free carbon for about 8 percent is sufficicent 
in  order  to  the  carbon  nets  start  to  form.  The  electrical 
conductivity  of  the  resulting  carbon  nets  was  calculated 
for  different  volume  carbon  concentrations.  It  is  shown 
that the formation of the carbon nets is a mechanism that 
can really explain the high values of conductivity of the 
DP  of  the  carbon-rich  condensed  explosives  behind  the 
Study of Thermal Sensitivity and Thermal Explosion Violence of Energetic 
Materials in the ODTX System 
Peter C. Hsu Gary Hust Micha Gresshoff Larry Fried H. Keo Springer John G. Reynolds 
Matthew McClelland and Jon L. Maienschein 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
Abstract.  The  One  Dimensional  Time  to  Explosion  ODTX  system  at  the  Lawrence  Livermore 
National  Laboratory  has  been  used  since  1970s  to  measure  times  to  explosion  threshold  thermal 
explosion temperature and determine kinetic parameters of energetic materials.  The ODTX testing can 
also  provide  useful  data  for  assessing  the  thermal  explosion  violence  of  energetic  materials.    It  is  a 
useful  tool  for  the  characterization  of  newly  developed  energetic  formulations.  Recent  ODTX 
experimental  data  as  well  as  data  modeling  for  ANPZ  and  DMDNP  will  be  reported  in  this  paper.  
More diagnostics are being added to the system to enhance its capability. 
Some  energetic  materials  e.g.  hydrogen 
peroxidefuel mixtures1 may explode cook-off at 
fairly low temperatures and the violence from the 
thermal explosion may cause a significant damage.  
Thus it is important to understand the response of 
energetic  materials  to  thermal  insults  for  safe 
handling and storage of energetic materials.  There 
has  been  an  extensive  study  on  the  thermal 
decomposition  and  thermal  explosion  violence  of 
energetic  materials  at  elevated  temperatures  in 
different  confinements  and  sample  geometries 
Thermal  explosion  studies  on  various  energetic 
materials in two-dimensional geometry such as the 
Scaled-Thermal-Explosion-Experiment 
system5  and  the  Sandia-Instrumented-ThermalIgnition  SITI  system  were  previously  reported6. 
The  ODTX  system  at  the  Lawrence  Livermore 
National  Laboratory  LLNL  has  been  used  for 
decades for cook-off study7-11.  It is attractive due 
to the minimal sample requirement up to 2 grams 
for each ODTX shot. The ODTX testing generates 
three  technical  data  1  lowest  temperature  at 
which  thermal  explosion  would  occur  threshold 
temperature Tli 2 times to thermal explosion at 
temperatures  above  Tli  for  the  calculation  of 
activation  energy  and  frequency  factor  and  3 
thermal explosion violence. It is a useful tool that 
characterization  of  new  energetic  materials  at 
routinely  at  LLNL 
Experiments and Results 
Energetic  materials 
in  a  spherical  cavity  between 
configurations  except  gaseous  samples  can  be 
tested in the ODTX system.  An aluminum shell is 
used  to  hold  powder  samples  pasty  samples  or 
liquid  samples.  Pressed  and  cast  samples  are 
delivered to the cavity of aluminum anvils directly 
without the use of the aluminum shell.  The testing 
involves  heating  a  1.27-cm  diameter  spherical 
aluminum  anvils.  The 
delivered  to  the  anvil  cavity  via  the  sample 
delivery  system  when 
predetermined  temperature.  A  microphone  sensor 
measures a sound signal which indicates the time 
at  which  a  thermal  explosion  occurs.  The  detail 
description  of  the  LLNL  ODTX  system  can  be 
Small-scale Safety Test Results on ANPZ and 
26-diamino-35-dintropyrazine  ANPZ  and 
26-dimethoxy-35-dinitropyrazine  DMDNP  are 
energetic  materials  that  are  intermediate  products 
in  the  synthesis  of  LLM-105  26-diamino-35dintropyrazine-1-oxide.  LLM-105  is  a  potential 
insensitive  high  explosive  under  development  at 
LLNL.  LLM-105 is attractive for its high density 
and good performance12. Both ANPZ and DMDNP 
are very insensitive to impact and have DSC peak 
exotherms  at  356  oC  and  277  oC  respectively.  
DMDNP  melts  at  164  oC  Table  1  lists  the  small 
scale  safety  test  data  for  comparison.  Although 
LLM-105 is more impact-sensitive than ANPZ and 
DMDNP it is more desirable for its high density. 
Table 1.  Small scale safety test results for DMDNP ANPZ and LLM-105 
Impact sensitivity drop 
Friction sensitivity kg 
Chemical Reactivity CRT at 
Peak temperature at 
ODTX  Times  to  Explosion  Data  for  ANPZ  and 
Both  ANPZ  and  DMDNP  were  pressed  into 
0.5  inch  spherical  parts  as  shown  in  Fig.  1  and 
Fig.  2.    Pressibility  of  the  materials  was  good 
without the use of binder though pressed density 
was  somewhat  limited  to  around  93  TMD.  
These parts were tested in the ODTX system over 
a  range  of  temperature.  Totally  over  10  ODTX 
shots  were  performed  on  each  materials  and  the 
times to thermal explosion data are shown in Table 
2  and  Table  3  respectively.  The  test  data  are 
plotted in Figure 3.  The figure also shows ODTX 
data  for  PETN  RDX  HMX  and  TATB  for 
comparison.  Also  shown  is  RX-55-AA  from 
ODTX  tests  done  in  1996  which  consists  of 
LLM-105  and  Viton.    The  ODTX  test  results 
indicated that the thermal sensitivity of ANPZ was 
between  those  of  TATB  and  HMX  and  was 
DMDNP  was  more  sensitive  than    ANPZ    and 
similar  to  HMX.    Reproducibility  of  tests  was 
excellent.  Testing  was  repeated  at  a  few 
temperatures for both materials and the results 
Fig.  1.  ANPZ  pressed  sphere  0.5  in  diameter 
Fig. 2. DMDNP pressed sphere 0.5 in diameter 
Table  2.  Times  to  thermal  explosion  data  for 
Table  4.  Threshold 
Between 181 and 192  
Between 192 and 215 
Thermal Explosion Violence 
After thermal explosion each aluminum anvil 
expansion.    Fig  3  shows  the  anvils  after  the 
DMDNP.  The thermal explosion violence for 
both ANPZ and DMDNP was much less than 
that of PBX-9501.   The anvils indicated some 
melting from the extremely hot gas generated 
thermal  explosion.  A  detailed 
description  and  comparison  of 
explosion  violence  for  various  energetic 
material  was  previously  reported  by  Hsu  et. 
Fig. 3. Spent anvils for DMDNP  right and 
middle and PBX-9501 left cavity volume 
increases for DMDNP were all significantly less 
than that for HMX-based formulations e.g. PBX9501. 
Table  3.  Times  to  thermal  explosion  data  for 
Table  4  shows  the  lowest  temperatures  at 
which  thermal  explosion  threshold  temperature 
Tli would occur.   ODTX testing on ANPZ at 192 
oC for 46.6 hours showed no thermal explosion but 
thermal  explosion  occurred  after  9.56  hours 
34425 seconds at 214.7  oC.  Thus the threshold 
temperature  for  ANPZ  is  less  than  214.7  oC  and 
higher than 192.0 oC.  For DMDNP the threshold 
temperature is less than 192.0  oC and higher than 
 95 LLM-105 less pure
Fig. 4. ODTX results for ANPZ AMDNP RX-55-AA and several commonly-used high explosives PETN 
ODTX Modeling for ANPZ and DMDNP 
For ODTX data modeling ER A and p were 
adjusted  with  mn1  to  fit  ODTX  experimental 
data.    A  is  the  frequency  factor  or  characteristic 
reaction  rate  and  the  quantity  ER  specifies  the 
temperature sensitivity.  The parameter p generates 
a  characteristic  time  delay  for  the  reaction  of  the 
scale  pA  for  mn1.    The  parameter  m  has  a 
strong  effect  on  reaction  progress  in  the  early 
stages  of  the  reaction  when  x1  while  n  is 
important  for  progress  during  the  later  stages  of 
the  reaction  when  x0.    The  measured  explosion 
times in this study provide data for the end time of 
thermal decomposition but no information related 
Consequently we  set  mn1.    Finally  it  is  noted 
that most ODTX reactions do not progress very far 
with 1-x less than 10 before thermal runaway 
ignition  and  explosion.    The  kinetic  parameters 
for thermal decomposition are listed in Table 4. 
earlier  progress  of 
m     1                              
The times to explosion data for both materials 
decomposition  kinetic  parameters  as  represented 
by  a  single-step  Prout-Tompkins  Arrhenius 
                                       
where  x    mass  fraction  of  reactant  remaining 
dimensionless A  frequency factor second-1 E  
the  activation  energy  Jmole  R    universal  gas 
constant 8.314 J K.mol T  temperature K n 
m q  Prout-Tompkins model kinetics parameters 
It is also convenient to define 
                     P-log101-q                         2 
Table  4.  Kinetic  parameters 
The model and measured explosion times for 
ANPZ and DMDNP are plotted versus 1T in Fig. 
5 and Fig. 6.  Although the model does not capture 
all  of  the  features  of  the  measurements  it  does 
provide a good overall representation of the data.   
Fig. 5. Comparison of model and experimental data for ANPZ. 
Fig. 6. Comparison of model and measured ODTX explosion times for DMDNP. 
transducer can monitor the gas pressure in-situ and 
have been implemented as part of the system.  The 
pressure  data  is  important  to  understand  the 
thermal  decomposition  kinetics  of  energetic 
materials  and  will  be  used  to  validate  cook-off 
models.    In  the  future  gas  analytical  instruments 
could  be  added  to  the  system  as  well  to  measure 
the  gas  composition  when  material  is  under Cylinder Test Characterization of an Ammonium Nitrate and Aluminum Powder
David L. Robbins Eric K. Anderson Mark U. Anderson Scott I. Jackson and Mark Short
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545
Sandia National Laboratories Albuquerque NM 87123
Abstract. While ammonium nitrate is itself detonable its sensitivity and performance
when combined with aluminum powder are substantially increased. In the present work
the results of a series of cylinder tests to characterize the performance of this explosive are
reported. In the test series the cylinder size is varied to determine the effect of cylinder diameter on performance. Explosive performance is characterized in terms of the detonation
energy and velocity. Results will allow determination of the explosive product equation of
state and extent of aluminum reaction in the detonation reaction zone.
Ammonium nitrate AN mixed with aluminum
powder is a non-ideal explosive explosive that releases energy after the detonation sonic surface that
exhibits a wide range of behaviors depending on
the particle size morphology and ratio of the components. While pure AN is not generally used as
an explosive it will detonate and experiments have
shown that manila paper tubes packed with AN will
detonate down to a critical diameter of 10-15 cm 1.
Detonation velocities of 1.1 mms at the critical
diameter and up to 2.8 mms for 46 cm charges
have been reported for AN packed in manila paper
tubes to a density of 1 gcc1. The addition of other
explosives such as TNT or fuels such as aluminum
or organic materials can increase the sensitivity of
AN2. Aluminum is considered the most effective
sensitizer reducing the critical diameter by an or
Approved for unlimited release LA-UR-14-24794
der of magnitude2 3 4 yet the role it plays in the
detonation reaction zone is not fully understood.
A signicant effort to understand the combustion of aluminum was made in the 1960s and
1970s. Glassman5 realized that metal combustion
is analogous to droplet combustion and that ignition and combustion behavior woul depend on the
melting and boiling points of the metal and oxide and that metal particles with an oxide shell
would not ignite until the melting point of the oxide was reached. He also observed that the rate of
aluminum combustion in air is controlled by diffusion of the fuel and oxidizer. A simple hydrocarbon droplet combustion model however cannot be readily adapted to aluminum combustion due
to the condensation of Al2O3 which contributes
signicantly to the heat release as well as potentially interfering with the combustion of the remaining aluminum6. Aluminum particles of several micron diameter or smaller suspended in air will also
detonate7. Experimental observations have shown
that the deagration-to-detonation transition DDT
Mixtures of AN and aluminum powder have been
referred to with several names including ammonal
and Tannerite a brand name. Here we will refer
to explosive mixtures of AN and aluminum power
as ammonals. Maranda4 reported results of a study
to investigate the inuence of particle size of the
aluminum and ammonium nitrate as well as oxide content of the aluminum on the detonation performance of ammonal. The results of the study
showed that detonation velocity and critical diameter varied signicantly depending on these parameters which is not unusual for a non-ideal explosive. For example when conned in a 36-mm-ID
3-mm-thick steel tube ammonal detonation velocity varied from approximately 1.2 mms for 5-10
aked aluminum with 30.9 Al2O3 content and
1.2-2.0 mm granulated ammonium nitrate to 3.67
mms for granulated aluminum with a mean particle size of 59 m and 7.5 Al2O3 blended with
0.06 to 0.3 mm diameter ground ammonium nitrate.
Failure diameters were also dependent on the particle size morphology and oxide content and ranged
from 10 to 20 mm for 1090 blends of aluminum
powderAN. These results underscore the need to
carefully control particle characteristics in ammonal
Other studies8 2 9 3 10 have reported similar
detonation velocities and failure diameters to those
of Maranda with critical diameter and detonation
velocity dependent on particle size and morphology.
Cylinder tests have been reported by Buczkowski
and Zygmunt11 as well as Souers et al.12. Results
showed detonation velocities ranging from 2.6 to
distance and detonation sensitivity are dependent on
initial pressure. These observations suggest gasphase kinetics in addition to diffusion are important in determining the reaction rate.
It has previously been assumed that aluminum
particles act as an inert in the detonation reaction
zone of ammonal combusting primarily in the postreaction zone expansion of detonation products13.
Here we intend to investigate the role of aluminum in ammonal detonation in cylinder tests
where the explosive is conned in a precisionmachined oxygen-free high-conductivity OFHC
99.99 pure copper cylinder. The test allows observation of the expansion of the cylinder which is af
fected by the time history of the explosive-product
energy-release. Analysis of the test can determine
the kinetic energy of the cylinder wall as a function
of time until breakage of the cylinder occurs.
Additional insight into the rate of the aluminum
reaction can be gained as the cylinder is scaled up
in size. Non-ideal explosives including ammonals tend to exhibit increased energy output as the
diameter of the charge is increased.
tests this results in increasing cylinder-wall velocities with increasing cylinder-test diameter. This
phenomenon is related to the well-known diameter
effect which refers to the increase in detonation velocity as the diameter of an explosive charge is increased. While the diameter effect on detonation velocity is observed in ideal and non-ideal explosives
the effect of diameter on wall velocity in a cylinder
test depends on the promptness of reaction following the lead shock in the detonation. An ideal explosive that reacts quickly before the sonic surface
would exhibit nearly identical scaled wall-velocity
proles across a range of cylinder-test diameters
whereas a non-ideal explosive exhibiting slower reactions tends to produce increased wall velocities
as the diameter is increased. This effect can be attributed to the higher post-sonic-surface temperatures which enable higher late reaction rates. By
enabling the measurement of energy release at multiple charge diameters scaled cylinder-tests provide
a means to determine the idealness of an explosive.
The aluminum powder used for this study is
99.8 pure with a 10 mass fraction diameter
D10 of 2.05 m D50 of 4.53 m and D90 of
10.59 m. The ammonium nitrate prill was 98
pure and ground in a grain mill to a D50 of 850 m
with a very narrow span D90 - D10. The materials were combined dry to achieve a mass ratio of
91 ammonium nitrate to aluminum. Mixing was
conducted by tumbling to assure a uniform mixture
and the copper cylinders were lled hand tapping
every third of the way to settle the material. Figure 1 shows a cylinder test assembly and Table 1
lists the ammonal mass and density for each test.
Tests were conducted in copper cylinders scaled
to two and three times the standard dimensions14
Table 2. PDV probe locations 2 in. cylinder test.
Probe Distance Distance
Table 3. PDV probe locations 3 in. cylinder test.
Probe Distance Distance
probe was aligned normal to the tube surface. To
ensure sufcient light collection during tube expansion which causes tube wall angle relative to the
probe to change the tube surface was prepared in a
manner that would scatter the light primarily along
the tube axis z-direction.
PDV velocities measured for the 2 in. cylinder are
shown in Fig. 4. As the gure shows good signals
were obtained for all eight probes and the velocity
proles were consistent each of the last three proles show over lapping data from two probes. The
time indicated in the gure is relative to the detonator trigger signal. In Fig. 5 velocities from each
probe have been shifted to have the same jump-off
times. Apart from probe 8 nearest to the booster
end of the cylinder the wall histories overlay well.
the rst test was conducted in a cylinder 2 in. inner
diameter ID 2.4 in. outer diameter OD and 24
in. long. The dimensions of the cylinder in the second test were 3 in. ID 3.6 in. OD and 36 in. long.
Tolerances were held to within 0.001 in. Both tubes
were annealed for ductility the smaller tube measured 25 on a Rockwell hardness F scale while the
large tube measured 35. These hardness values indicate the near-maximum ductility required for maximum expansion before rupture.
Each cylinder was detonated with eleven evenly
spaced ionization wires to measure phase velocity
D0 and results are reported in Table 1. These results when combined with previous metal-conned
tests of 90 ammonium nitrate 10 aluminum
powder produce the diameter-effect curve of Fig. 2.
It should be noted that the previous results reported
in this gure were conducted with either 5 20 or 95
m aluminum particle diameter and 60 m AN particles but despite varying particle sizes the current
results agree well with the diameter-effect curve t
to the previous results showing that cylinder diameter has a more signicant effect on D0 than aluminum or ammonium nitrate particle size at least
within the range of sizes tested.
Table 1. Ammonal test results. Standard error associated with the linear t to ionization wire data is
reported following the  symbol.
Wall Velocity Measurements
For each cylinder test PDV probes were located
at the positions listed in Table 2 and Table 3. Measurements z and r are as dened in Fig. 3. Each
Fig. 1. Photograph of an ammonal cylinder test assembly.
Probe 8 exhibits the lowest velocities near the end of
the measurement. Consistent velocity proles produced by the rest of the probes indicate that the detonation in the 2-in. cylinder has relaxed to a quasisteady state. Figure 6 shows position vs.
time results computed from the velocity proles. Again
good consistency between probes is apparent.
PDV velocities measured for the 3 in. cylinder are
shown in Fig. 7. As the gure shows good signals
were obtained for six probes and the velocity proles appear to demonstrate faster wall acceleration
and higher peak velocities as probe distance from
the booster end of the cylinder increased. The proles diverge for the two probes with approximately
125 s jump-off time and also for the probes with
158 s jump-off time. These differences could be
due either to the bore of the cylinder being off-axis
from the outer surface or setting of the ammonal
before the shot was red. In Fig. 8 velocities from
each probe have been shifted to have the same jump
off time. Unlike the 2-in. cylinder the wall velocity history is continually modied as the detonation moves down the cylinder. Specically the wall
accelerates more rapidly and attains progressively
higher velocities. This indicates that over time
additional energy is being generated in the conversion of reactants into equilibrium products. We con
jecture that the higher post-sonic surface temperatures in the 3-in. cylinder allow late time energy release associated with the slow burning of aluminum
the effects of which become more pronounced as
the detonation moves down the cylinder. Figure 9
shows position vs. time results computed from the
In Fig 10 velocity proles from both the 2 in. and
3 in. test are plotted against timescale factor scale
factor 2 for the 2 in. test and 3 for the 3 in. test in
the usual geometric scaling fashion17. In the scaled
time co-ordinate we note that the wall velocity history for the 2-in. test is similar to the wall velocity
history recorded in the 3-in. test for probes located
nearer to the booster end of the 3 in. cylinder. This
indicates that during the early evolution of the 3-in.
test the energy driving the wall expansion is similar in magnitude to the energy driving the wall in
the 2-in. test in its quasi-steady propagation phase.
However as the detonation propagates further along
the cylinder in the 3-in. test the wall begins to expand faster relative to the geometrically scaled time
as more energy is being delivered to the wall presumably as noted above through additional latetime reaction of aluminum in the 3-in. test.
Fig. 2. Diameter effect for copper or steel conned cylindrical ammonal tests blended at 90 ammonium
nitrate 10 aluminum. Results of the current study are indicated by the  symbols and results from previous
experiments at LLNL12 are indicated by the symbols. The symbol indicates the CJ velocity for this blend
computed with Cheetah15 and the curve represents a t to the short Erying form D0  DCJ 1 A
described in Jackson and Short16.
The slight discrepancy is due to the higher ammonal
density for the 2 in. test. Gurney energy is typically
reported at a scaled displacement of 19 mm as G19.
For the 2 in. ID test G19 varies from 1.65 to 1.77
kJg while that of the 3 in. ID test varies from 1.59
The results of Table 4 show a great deal of consistency amongst the PDV probes for the 2 in. ID
cylinder with the exception of probe 8. The velocities measured by this probe are slightly lower
suggesting that the detonation is not yet fully developed at this axial z location.
For the 3 in. ID cylinder data was not acquired
for probes 1 and 2. Probes 7 and 8 recorded
lower velocities at each location compared to the
other probes on this cylinder indicating that the detonation is not yet steady at these locations. Probes
36 recorded higher velocities for the 3 in. test
than for the 2 in. test indicating that 3 in. test is able
to capture late aluminum reaction that is missed in
the 2 in. cylinder test. All probes indicated that the
velocity continues to increase past the 19 mm scaled
Wall Velocity Measurements
Wall velocities are typically reported at standard
scaled outer wall displacements of 6 12.5 and
19 mm to allow comparison between different-sized
cylinders. Since these displacements are scaled to a
1 in. ID cylinder test they become 12 25 and 38
mm for the 2 in. ID test and 18 37.5 and 57 mm
for the 3 in. ID test.
In Table 4 radial wall velocities vr for each
PDV probe are reported at the three scaled outer
wall displacements. Using these velocities Gurney energy a frequently-used measure of explosive
product energy can be computed with the equation
where mw is the wall mass per unit length and
mHE is the explosive mass per unit length18. As
stated in the equation Gurney energy is the square
of wall velocity multiplied by a factor that is constant for each cylinder test. This multiplier is 2.275
for the 2 in. ID test and 2.307 for the 3 in. ID test.
Table 4. Velocities extracted at scaled outer wall displacements.
PDV Velocity at Scaled Displacements
tions for the 2 in. ID cylinder test and six locations
for the 3 in. ID cylinder test.
For the 3 in. cylinder test PDV proles indicated
that the detonation was not steady until beyond the
probe located 13 of the way down length of the
tube whereas the detonation appeared quasi-steady
at this location for the 2 in. test. Also beyond the
rst 13 of the tube the 3 in. test produced higher
wall velocities than the 2 in. test. Both of these results suggest that aluminum releases more energy in
the higher-temperature post-detonation expansion
PDV measurements were used to compute the
wall velocities at standard wall displacements
and as seen in the PDV proles more of the tube
length was required to reach steady state for the 3 in.
test. Also higher velocities were recorded at each
scaled wall displacement for the 3 in. test compared
to the 2 in. test after the rst 13 of tube length. Similar results were observed by Souers et al.12 as tube
diameters were increased from 0.5 in. to 1 in. using
a 90 AN10 Al with different particle sizes.
wall displacement suggesting that aluminum reaction continues past this point in the cylinder expansion.
The results of 90 AN10 Al cylinder tests reported by Souers et al.12 are summarized in Table
5. While the aluminum and ammonium nitrate particle sizes were different making direct comparison
with the current effort difcult a similar trend of increasing wall velocities with increasing cylinder diameter can be seen. The two tests conducted using
6.35 mm ID cylinders displayed substantially lower
wall velocities than the 12.72 mm ID cylinder test
suggesting more energy from aluminum reaction is
captured as the test is scaled up from 12 in. ID to 1
Cylinder tests were performed using ammonal
blended with 90 AN10 Al extending the diameter of reported cylinder tests with this blend to 3 in.
ID. Phase velocities were measured and found to be
in good agreement with the Erying form diametereffect t to previous metal-conned ammonal tests
using the 9010 ratio. Successful PDV wall velocity measurements were obtained at eight loca
831
Table 5. Results of 90 An10 Al cylinder tests reported by Souers et al.12.
Cyl. Vel. at Scaled Displacements
Fig. 4. Velocity proles obtained for the 2 in. ammonal cylinder.
Fig. 3. Distances z and r which dene the position
of each PDV probe in Tables 2 and 3.
Fig. 5. Velocity proles shifted along the x-axis for
the 2 in. ammonal cylinder.
Fig. 6. Wall position proles obtained for the 2 in.
Fig. 7. Velocity proles obtained for the 3 in. ammonal cylinder.
Fig. 8. Velocity proles shifted along the x-axis for
the 3 in. ammonal cylinder.
Fig. 9. Wall position proles obtained for the 3 in.
Fig. 10. Wall position proles obtained for the 2
in. test black and the 3 in. test red. Proles are
shifted along the x-axis to begin expansion at the
same time and the x-axis is also scaled by cylinderInitiation of Composition B-3 by impact of at nosed rods
Richard L. Gustavsen Dana M. Dattelbaum Hugh R. James Brian D. Bartram and Adam H. Pacheco
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 USA
AWE Aldermaston Reading Berkshire RG7 4PR UK
Abstract. We present an experimental investigation of initiation of bare or uncovered
Composition B-3 Comp B-3 explosive by the impact of at nosed rods. Composition
B-3 nominally consists of 60 weight  RDX 135-Trinitroperhydro-135-triazine and
40 weight  TNT 2-Methyl-135-trinitrobenzene or 246-Trinitrotoluene. Comp B-3
contains no wax whereas 1 wax is used in other Composition B formulations. Experiments were conducted using a single-stage gas-gun. A at nosed rod machined from type
SAE 304 stainless steel was attached to the front of a gas-gun projectile. The rod impacted
the explosive while the projectile was still in the barrel. This conguration resulted in accurate centering of the rod on the explosive target. Seven channels of Photonic Doppler
Velocimetry PDV were used to measure shock waveproles after transmission through
the explosive. Velocimetry measurement points were located at different radii from the
center of the rod. This allowed us to capture the 2-D characteristics of the ow. Multiple
sets or sequences of experiments were performed. Each set of experiments used a constant
rod diameter impact velocity and PDV probe layout the thing that was varied from experiment to experiment was the thickness of the Comp B-3 explosive sample. In this way we
built up a detailed experimental records of the impact and reaction dynamics. All experiments in this study used an impact velocity near 1.1 kms resulting in an impact stress of 
Bullet tests1 are a model experimental system
for problems related to explosive safety. Projectiles
with cylindrical symmetry and measured velocity
uimp are red from a gun at an explosive test sample. Results are typically recorded as a go meaning detonation or a no-go meaning non detonation. In most tests the projectile size and shape will
be xed and the test repeated with varying bullet velocities in order to determine a velocity threshold
at which there is a 50 probability of initiating a
Instrumentation for bullet tests is usually very
simple. First the projectile velocity is measured.
Sometimes this is just inferred from projectile mass
vs. charge weight characterization tables. Methods
for measuring or inferring a go or detonation are
often quite simple as well a dent in a metal witness plate2 or a ash generated by a pressure sensitive paint. More sophisticated techniques measure
shock transit times using piezo or electrical shorting
pins.3 High speed photography has also been used
both to measure the projectile velocity and to deter
836
mine evidence of reaction or detonation.4 5
In planar shock initiation experiment a great deal
of time and effort has been expended in measuring the ow eld produced by the reacting explosive. Examples include pressure gauges6 7 magnetic particle velocity gauges8 9 10 and velocity
interferometry.11 12 13 14 These kinds of measurements are often used to calibrate reactive burn
models15 16 17 18 that are used to make direct numerical simulations of initiation and detonation. By
contrast in measurements of projectile impact on
explosives very little effort has gone into measuring details of the ow eld.
Recently we completed a series of at nosed
rod initiation experiments using the explosive PBX
9501 955 weight HMXnitro-plasticized estane
binder. 19 The experiments were conducted using
a single stage gas-gun a stainless steel rod was attached to the front of the projectile. Impact of the
rod on the explosive occurred while the projectile
was still in the barrel. This enabled the explosive
and instrumentation to be accurately positioned relative to the rod. The ow at the back of the sample
was measured using multi-point Photonic Doppler
Velocimetry PDV.20 The current paper extends
that work to the explosive Composition B-3.
Flow resulting from impact of a at-nosed rod
Figure 1a shows a at nosed cylindrical rod
with diameter D and velocity uimp about to impact
an explosive. The key wave fronts for the resulting
ow are shown in Fig. 1b. The impact drives a
shock wave into the explosive. At early time near
the center of the rod tip the ow is one-dimensional
and the shock front is at. The pressure in this region can be calculated using standard shock physics
equations. Outside this central region the shock
front is curved and the pressure is lower. A rarefaction emanating from the edge of the rod continually
reduces the diameter of the 1-D compression region.
Until the side rarefactions reach the axis the ow in
the central region is similar to that of 1-D reactive
ow. Afterwards the driving pressure decreases and
the initiation process has many similarities with initiation by a short-duration shock 22 21. Prompt initiation if it occurs takes place on the axis. How
a detonation wave spreads out from the initiation
In particular the region
point is also of interest.
of diverging shock with reduced pressure has been
pre-shocked or shock-desensitized. The detonation wave may not propagate through this preshocked region and a dead zone may form near the
edge of the rod. Recent computational results by
Menikoff23 show this behavior.
Finally near the edge of the rod there is a region
of large shear displacement. An idealization is that
explosive in front of the rod face is moving straight
ahead while the material to the side is stationary. At
the boundary is a region of high shear displacement
that could get very hot due to frictional or viscous
heating. The hot region could serve as an additional
site for energy release.
To distinguish between shock initiation and shear
initiation we propose that if the shock pressures
are in the  1 - 10 GPa range and the time to detonation is  10 s then we are dealing with shock
initiation phenomena. That is if times and distances
to detonation onset are approximately predicted by
the Pop-plot24 then we are dealing with shock initiation phenomena.
Experimental Details
Figure 2 shows the overall conguration for the
at nosed rod impact experiments. A at nosed rod
is mounted onin a projectile driven by our 71 mm
diameter bore single stage gas gun. The rod impacts a disk of Comp B-3 explosive backed by a
window. The experiment is repeated holding the rod
diameter constant and impact velocity constant but
with different thickness of explosive. The velocity
of the explosive window interface is measured using
multi-point velocity interferometry.20 Detailed 2-D
measurements of how the reactive ow evolves as it
propagates deeper into the explosive can be assembled.
The gas gun conguration has several advantages over other congurations for bullet test experiments. First the impact velocity is very repeatable
typically to within 1 - 2 . There is also instrumentation for accurately measuring the impact velocity
in each and every shot. Second because the projectile is in the gun at impact the target and any
attached diagnostics can be carefully aligned to the
rod. We estimate that the target is centered on the
Fig. 1. Schematic cartoon of a a rod about to impact an explosive and b the leading wave fronts in the
explosive shortly after impact. After James21
Fig. 2. Conguration for at nosed rod shock initiation experiments.
rod to within 0.5 mm. Finally impact while the projectile is in the barrel eliminates pitch and yaw problems. The at face of the rod impacts the at face of
the explosive and is aligned to  1 mradian or 0.06
Stainless Steel Rods
Flat nosed rods were machined from SAE grade
304 stainless steel nominally 72 Fe 18 Cr
10 Ni. Rods were nominally 50.8 mm long as
measured from the at surface of the magnesium
projectile to the rod tip. Nominal rod diameters
were 7.0 and 12.7 mm.
Composition B-3 explosive
The Comp B-3 used in our study was Holtston
lot HOL85G461-004 and consisted of nominally 60
weight  RDX and 40 weight  TNT. Approximately 6.5 weight  of the RDX was HMX impurities. The formulation contained no wax. Charges
were hot pressed under vacuum and machined to nal dimensions. Average charge density was 1.725
Explosive samples were in the form of cylinders
or disks with diameter 43.2 mm 1.7 and thickness ranging from 3 - 8 mm. Holding rod diameter
and impact velocity constant at different explosive
thickness the wave will evolve to different shape.
Roddiameter  DExplosiveimpact velocity  uimpUsExplosiveRegion of 1-D compressionRegion of diverging shock with reduced pressureRing of large shear displacementbaGas Gun BarrelPMMA Window6 m aluminum foilComposition B 7 PDV probes on 2.4 mm spacing span 0.0 - 14.4 mm304 Stainless Steel Rod PDV probe to measure projectile velocity and impact time ProjectileThat is the wave will either be growing in amplitude and building toward detonation or shrinking in
amplitude and tending toward failure. Using different explosive thicknesses this evolution can be
tracked and recorded.
The reective surface between the Comp B-3 explosive and the window is 9 m thick aluminum
foil obtained from All Foils Inc. httpwww.
allfoils.com. The side with the matte nish is placed toward the window. It was important
to use a diffuse reector in these experiments because the diverging part of the shock wave is curved
and specular reectors return very little light to the
velocimeter probe. One experiment with a vapor
plated specular reector lost all light as soon as the
diverging part of the shock reached the reector.
The matte nish aluminum reectors by contrast
returned sufcient light even from the diverging part
polymethylmethacrylate
PMMA 38.1 mm in diameter by 12.7 mm
thick. PMMA was Rohm and Haas type II UVA
Plexiglas. Both surfaces were diamond turned resulting in at parallel surfaces with optical quality
The velocity of the Al foil reector at the Composition B-3PMMA window interface was measured
using Photonic Doppler Velocimetry PDV.20 PDV
is a velocity interferometer that uses 1550 nm light
generated by ber lasers.
It is constructed using
single-mode ber-optic components widely used for
long-haul ber optic based communications. As
seen in Fig.2 velocity was measured at 7 different radial locations at the back of the sample.
PDV probes were obtained from AC Photonics
httpwww.acphotonics.com part
1CL15P020LCC01. This is a collimating
probe with a working distance beam waist of 20
mm and a typical spot size of 150 m.
Probe optics are housed in brass or stainless steel
tubes 2.4 mm in diameter. This means that probes
can be placed 2.4 mm apart. As shown in Fig. 2
we placed all 7 of the probes asymmetrically on one
side of the axis and stacked them as close together
as possible.  We are counting on the ow being axisymmetric and capturing half of the ow should be
sufcient. In summary the probes were placed at
0.0 2.4 4.8 7.2 9.6 12.0 and 14.4 mm from the
axis. We note that neither the body diameter nor
the light pointing direction of this probe is carefully
controlled. Furthermore it has not been measured
either by AC photonics or by us. Lateral probe locations are therefore unfortunately approximate and
An eighth PDV probe extended in front of the
sample nominally 50.8 mm. This probe was used
to measure the projectile velocity. Secondly the at
surface of the projectile body impacted the probe
at nominally the same time as the rod tip impacted the Comp B. Using this method we are able
to cross reference all PDV measurements to impact
time. We note that the length of the stainless steel
rod above the projectiles at surface as well as the
length of the eighth PDV probe above the Comp B
sample are accurately measured.
The shock pressure or more formally the longitudinal stress in the region of 1-D compression can be
calculated using the impedance matching method.33
In this method the pressure P  and particle velocity up at the interface of the rod tip and explosive
must be equal. Using subscript 1 to denote the
rod and 2 to denote the Comp B target we have
P1  01US1uimp  up  P2  02US2up 1
In Eq. 1 0 is the density at ambient conditions
uimp is the rod impact velocity and US is the shock
velocity. In this paper we use linear US  up equations of state
for both the rod and the Comp B. In Eq. 2 C0 and
S are constants specic to the material. These are
given in Table 1 below. We note that there is a fairly
wide range of reactant EOS parameters available for
Comp B. We will use the recent values determined
by Gibson et al.32 for the rest of this paper. The
Table 1. Equation of State parameters used in Eqs. 1 - 9.
304 Stainless Steel25
Grueneisen parameter value of   1 for Comp B
It is useful to calculate the Eulerian bulk sound
speed Cb in the shocked explosive. This gives the
speed of the rarefaction waves spreading into the region of 1-D compression.
In Eq. 3 P and V are the pressure and specic
volume in the shocked state and V0 is the specic
volume at ambient conditions. Also in In Eq. 3 the
subscript H means that the derivative is calculated
 in Eq. 3 is the Gruneisen parameter
To calculate Cb we use the approximation
Using the Hugoniot jump condition
the pressure on the Hugoniot can be put in the form
The derivative of pressure with respect to volume
on the Hugoniot is then
The above equations are sufcient to calculate Cb
on the Hugoniot state.
Summary data from 8 experiments is shown in
Table 2 below. The shot number is the unique identier for the experiment. Shots are grouped by rod
diameter and then sample thickness. Other data include the Comp B-3 density rod impact velocity
the impact pressure particle velocity and Eulerian
sound speed. The effective pulse length  is
where D is the rod diameter and Cb is the Eulerian
sound speed given by Eq. 3.21  is approximately
the time at which the volume of the region experiencing 1-D compression is a maximum.
Following Walker and Wasley22 the energy in the
Figure 3 shows wave proles obtained in shot no.
1s-1562 a 7.0 mm diameter rod impacts 3 mm
of Comp B at 1.125 kms. The nearly simultaneous arrival of shocks at radial positions of 0
and 2.4 mm indicate a planar wave in the center. The triangular wave shape and the amplitude
Table 2. Summary of experiments
of the peak are consistent with a ZeldovichvonNeumannDoering chemical reaction zone. That is
directly beneath the at end of the rod the explosive has turned over to a detonation. Waves at larger
radii arrive later and have smaller amplitude a consequence of the diverging ow. The probe just outside the planar region at 4.8 mm is consistent with
initiating ow. The radial velocity of the radial disturbance between the 12.0 and 14.4 mm probes is 
2.9 kms indicating that this is not a detonation.
Fig. 3. Wave proles from shot 1s-1562 a 7.0 mm
diameter stainless steel rod impacts 3 mm of Comp
B at 1.125 kms. The legend indicates the radial
position of the PDV probe corresponding to the velocity trace.
Figure 4 shows wave proles obtained in the two
sets of experiments with 7.0 and 12.7 mm diameter
rods. All experiments are shown on a single plot so
that comparisons are easy to make. From Table 2
we note that the impact conditions were nearly the
same for all experiments. An exception is shot no.
1s-1577 which had a lower velocity and therefore
impact pressure. What varies is the rod diameter
and explosive thickness.
Similarities in results are that all experiments
even those with only 3 mm explosive thickness
show some wave proles representative of detonation.
In saying a prole is representative of detonation we mean its shape and peak amplitude
are consistent with the von-Neumann spike seen in
other explosives using interferometry and PMMA
windows.34. Both sets of experiments show detonation starting in the region of 1-D compression.
Beyond an explosive thickness of 5 mm proles indicate detonation at all radii 0 - 14.4 mm for both
rod diameters. Finally for both rod diameters and
for explosive thicknesses of 3 and 4 mm proles
obtained from diameters outside the rod are consistent with buildup to detonation.
Differences between the 7.0 and 12.7 mm rod
experiments is the transient hump that is very
prominent for the 12.7 mm rod experiments and
essentially non existent in the 7.0 mm rod experiments. The source of this transient will be discussed
in the next section.
Several features of these results warrant further
comment. First we did not expect onset of detonation within 3 mm as was observed for both the
7.0 mm and 12.7 mm rods. Dewey1 reported no
ignition for 7.62 mm diameter 0.30 inch rods impacting Comp B at velocities of 1.0 kms. Therefore we did not expect the 7.0 mm diameter rods to
Fig. 4. Wave proles generated using 12.7 mm diameter rods a  d and 7.0 mm diameter rods e  f. The
legend in plot e applies to all plots and indicates the nominal distance the PDV probe is from the centerline.
The velocity recorded is the component of velocity in the direction of projectilerod motion.
cause initiation. Secondly de Longueville et al.29 in
short shock experiments found a threshold energy of
1.4 MJm2 for Comp B. Our 7.0 mm diameter rods
had typical energies of 1.36 MJm2 and therefore
should have been just under that threshold energy.
While a marginal ignition might be plausible the
extremely prompt ignition with  3 mm distance to
detonation was not expected. Thirdly at impact velocities of 1.12 kms the impact stress is  7.0 GPa.
According to the work of Ramsay and Popolato24
this should result in a distance to detonation of 
7 mm. We used the results of both Ramsay and
Popolato24 and Dewey1 to plan these experiments
and therefore were surprised to see onset of detonation in less than 3 mm. More recent work by Urtiew
et al.31 and Gibson et al.32 indicate a distance to
detonation at 7 GPa of  4 mm again substantially
greater than the distance we observed.
At the time we designed and executed these experiments we did not differentiate between the different types of Comp B. Due to the lack of wax or
due to a different microstructure Comp B3 is considerably more sensitive than Comp B with  1
wax. Jacobs Liddiard and Drimmer35 performed
explosively driven planar wedge tests on Comp B
and Comp B-3. At an initial pressure of 6.7 GPa
they found distances to detonation of  6 mm in
Comp B and  2.5 mm in Comp B-3. The 2.5 mm
distance to detonation in Comp B-3 is quite consistent with the results presented here.
The transient hump that is prominent in the
records from the on axis probes for the 12.7 mm
rods Fig4 a at 0.0 mm and  1.5 s has been the
source of much discussion and uncertainty. Several
explanations including that of a late time reaction
have been postulated. Such features were not seen
in similar experiments on the HMX based explosive PBX 9501.19 Furthermore they have not been
seen in planar shock initiation experiments including those on Comp B.31 32
Recent work by James36 provides a coherent explanation for this hump. The rarefaction fans
originating from the periphery of the rod cause a
drop in pressure when they reach the centerline. The
drop in pressure is coincident with an increase in the
axial component of particle velocity along the centerline this is the component measured by the PDV
probes. Supporting this idea analytic calculations
show the leading edge of the rarefaction fan reaching the centerline probe position at the time at which
the particle velocity starts to change directions 
1.1 s in Fig4 a. Reactive burn simulations using
the CREST17 model with a PBX 9501 calibration
there is no CREST calibration for Comp B yet further support this explanation.36 They clearly show
the hump but only at high impact velocities large
rod diameters and thin HE sample thicknesses. In
other congurations the hump may be obscured by
other hydrodynamic phenomena such as buildup to
detonation or a steep Taylor wave.Empirical formula of size effect curve and pressure measurement 
for confined ANAC mixture  
Atsumi Miyake  Yuuki Yamamoto  Tei Saburi   Yuji Wada  and Shiro Kubota  
 Yokohama National University                                         
Tokiwadai Hodogaya-ku Yokohama Japan 
 National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology 
16-1 Onogawa Tsukuba Ibaraki 305-8569 Japan 
The  size  effect  curves  for  an  ammonium  nitrate  AN  and  AN-base  explosive  are 
discussed based on the steel tube test. The samples are mixtures of the AN and activated 
carbon  AC.  The  effects  of  the  size  confinement  and  composition  on  the  detonation 
velocity are clarified and the size effect curves for various compositions are summarized 
by  empirical  equation.  The  pressure  measurements  by  the  PVDF  gauge  are  also 
conducted in the steel tube test with 35.5 mm inner diameter for the mixture of 7wt  AC.  
The partially reacted state is estimated by two phases of the detonation products and the 
Hugoniot and the measured pressures are investigated with partially reacted state in P-V 
plane. Finally the pressure at the sonic plane is estimated. 
Ammonium nitrate AN has been used for the 
main  component  of  the  many  types  of  industrial 
explosives.  Those  explosives  exhibit  highly  nonideal behaviors and its phenomena have attracted 
researchers  of  detonation  physics1-14. 
Understanding  of  the  non-ideality  is  important 
from  the  viewpoints  of  engineering  applications 
and explosive safety.  The range of the non-ideal 
behavior  of  AN  based  explosives  becomes  wide 
compared  with  the  case  of  the  general  high 
explosive. Regardless with or without confinement 
the non-ideal behavior appears. For the unconfined 
case  the  experiment  requires  relatively  large 
diameter  so  the  experimental  system  becomes 
large.  On  the  other  hand  confined  case  such  as 
steel  tube relatively  small  diameter  is  allowed  to 
investigate the size effect. We have considered that 
the  information  for  understanding  of  non-ideal 
detonation can be obtained from the steel tube test 
with relatively small diameter. Although there are 
many  simple  models  for  estimating  the  non-ideal 
behaviors in recent years a numerical simulation 
is  a  more  powerful  method.  The  information  for 
verification of validity for numerical simulation is 
required  and we have  already  conducted a  series 
of experiments for steel tube test15-17.   
The  sample  was  the  mixtures  of  AN  and 
activated  carbon  AC.  The  effects  of  the  size 
confinement  and  composition  on  the  detonation 
velocity  of  ANAC  mixtures  were  clarified  and 
the size effect curves for various composition were 
summarized by empirical equation.  
Experiment and data analysis of size effect  
Fig.  1  shows  the  experimental  set-up.  The 
sample was loaded into a steel tube which had a 
length of 350 mm. It has the same configuration as 
the  previous  one  and  those  data  were  used  for 
empirical formulation of the size effect curve. The 
diameter  and  the  thickness  of  the  steel  tube  were 
varied. Fifty grams of Composition C-4 explosive 
1400  kgm3  DC-J7.05  kms  loaded  into  a 
polyvinyl  chloride  PVC  tube  was  used  for  the 
booster  and  it  was  initiated  with  an  electric 
detonator. Detonation velocity was measured with 
four  ionization  probes  which  were  placed  at 
intervals  of  50  mm.  Detonation  pressure  was 
measured  simultaneously  with  a  PVDF  gauge 
PVF2-11-.125-EK  of  Dynasen  Inc..  The  gauge 
was  sandwiched  between  two  PMMA  plates  and 
the thickness of upper plate was varied. 
The powdered AN average particle diameter 
0.14  mm  purity  was    99    was  used  as  the 
sample. The activated carbon with density of 260 
kgm3  has  an  average  diameter  of  3.41  nm.  The 
relationship  between  the  detonation  velocity  and 
the  mixing  ratio  of  AC  are  shown  in  Fig.  2.  The 
detonation  velocity 
mixing ratio of AC but above a mixing ratio of 5 
wt AC no significant change was observed. The 
relationships  between  the  detonation  velocity  and 
initial density are shown in Figs 3 and 4. 
No.6 electric detonator
Inner diameter  35.5
Fig. 1. Experimental set up 
Fig.  2.  The  relationship  between  the  detonation 
velocity and the mixing ratio of AC.  
Initial denisity gcm3
Fig.  3.  The  relationships  between  the  detonation 
initial  density  obtained  by  our 
The  data  in  Fig.  3  were  obtained  by  the  mixing 
ratio from 0 to 20  and under the various charge 
diameters. The detonation velocity decreases with 
density.  This  trend  can  be  confirmed  also  with 
Initial denisity gcm3
initial  density  of 
Fig.  4.  The  detonation  velocity  vs.  initial  density 
obtained by 52.7 mm steel tube test. 
Figure.4  corresponds  to  the  52.7  mm  charge 
decreases with the increasing of the mixing ratio of 
detonation is higher. Under the same mixing ratio 
the scattering of the initial density is small. Even 
so the ratio of the detonation velocity to that at an 
infinite charge diameter is used to discuss the size 
and confinement effects.  
Empirical formula of size effect  
relationship  between 
velocity and the charge radius R can be expressed 
                                             1 
where D  is  the  measured detonation  velocity Di  
is the velocity of the ideal detonation calculated by 
Cheetah code with BKWC database. This equation 
is  based  on  the  curved-front  theory  by  Eyring1. 
The theory assumes that any small portion of the 
detonation  wave  can  be  approximated  by  a 
spherical  detonation  wave.  The  conservation  law 
the  detonation  front  and  generalized  C-J 
condition were adopted to formulate equation 1.  
Although  the  Eq.  1  is  not  an  exact  it  can  well 
express  the  experimental  data.  Because  the  steel 
pipes  were  the  Japanese  standard  product  the 
ratios  of  the  diameter  and  the  thickness  of  the 
pipes  were  not  constant.  Therefore  to  ignore  the 
influence  of  the  difference  of  the  ratio  of  the 
diameter  and  thickness  following  equation  was 
applied to fit the data instead of eq. 1.  
                         2 
the  explosive  and 
Where We and Wc are the mass per unit areas 
for  the  explosive  and  for  the  confinement.  The 
variables   and t are the density and the thickness 
of  the  confinement.  The  subscripts  e  and  c 
respectively  denote 
confinement. The parameter a in Eqs. 1 and 2 
was  considered  to  be  the  reaction  zone  length  in 
the  1940s.  Later  the  existence  of  an  effective 
reaction  zone  in  the  highly  non-ideal  explosive 
was suggested and supported6. 
      The size effect curve for AN is shown in Fig.5. 
The previous experimental data obtained by large 
scale test are also plotted. To remove the influence 
from the difference of the ratio of the diameter and 
thickness of the pipe the value 
employed  as  the  horizontal  axis.  The  measured 
detonation velocity approaches to its ideal value at 
the infinite charge diameter in the case of the large 
scale  data18.  The  parameter  a  in  Eq.  2  was  3.6. 
The  problem  is  that  the  many  experimental  data 
are required to determine the parameter a i.e. size 
effect.  In  contrast  in  case  of  the  small  diameter 
the fitting line shown by the dashed line in Fig.5 
does  not  attain  the  value  at  an  infinite  charge 
diameter.  The  Eq.  2  cannot  be  applied  to  small 
scale  region. The reason is the  mechanism  of  the 
detonation  propagation  is  different  at  the  two 
Figures  6  and  7  show  the  size  effect  for  the 
mixture  of  ANAC.    In  Fig.7  the  results  of  AN 
were  also  plotted.  All  results  were  obtained  by 
steel tube test with relatively small diameters.  For 
all mixing ratio the same tendency was confirmed. 
The detonation velocity increases linearly with an 
increasing in the diameter.  
Fig. 5. Size effect curve for AN  
Fig. 6. Size effect curve for AN and mixture of the 
ANAC  0.5 wt  1 wt  and 5 wt AC 
Regardless  of  the  mixing  ratio  the  slopes  of  the 
linear lines are almost the same. Those lines does 
not attain to ideal value. 
To prepare the empirical equation which can 
reproduce  those  experimental  data  is  very  useful. 
We have tried to formulate empirical equation for 
our experimental data. From the observation of our 
experimental data it can be seen that the intercept 
is  a  function  of  the  mixing  ratio  and  everything 
else is unrelated to the mixing ratio. 
                                3 
Fig.  7.  Size  effect  curve  for  ANAC    0.1  wt  
The relation between  the  detonation velocity 
and the charge radius can be shown as follows for 
This  empirical  equation  has  a  non-dimensional 
parameter  DX   at  1R    0.  The  coefficient  K  is  a 
constant and in this case is one. The intercept was 
determined as the function of the mixing ratio . 
In Fig. 7 the size effect curves predicted by eq.3 
were  by  solid  lines.  It  is  necessary  to  note  the 
range  of  application.  When  a  horizontal  axis  of 
Figs 6 and 7 is referred it is effective within the 
range of 0.08-0.3. The mixing ratio of AC is 0-5. 
Within  the  range  of  5-10  the  prediction  for 
                             4 
For a mixing ratio of 1.0 wt. AC as shown 
in  Fig.7  the  discrepancy  between  the  prediction 
line  and  the  experimental  data  is  confirmed  for 
small  diameters.  It  is  considered  that  for  small 
relatively low the effect of the strength of the steel 
pipe on the reaction rate cannot be ignored. 
the  generated  pressure 
Fig.  8.  The  results  of  the  pressure  measurements 
Results of the pressure measurements  
The results of the pressure measurements by 
PVDF  gauge  are  shown  in  Fig.  8.  Except  for  the 
thickness  of  the  PMMA  plate  the  experimental 
conditions are same for each shot. The thicknesses 
of  the  PMMA  plate  are  3  4  and  5  mm  and  the 
corresponding  measured  detonation  velocities  are 
3.24 3.22 and 3.20 kms respectively. Although 
the peak pressure of the 5 mm case is the greater 
than others the peak pressure and the gradient of 
the  pressure  attenuation  behind  the  detonation 
front  for  3  and  4  mm  cases  are  almost  the  same. 
We  have  considered  the  following  assumption. 
The  pressure  attenuation  behind  the  detonation 
front of the ANAC mixture is relatively small so 
approximately applied. If such assumption can be 
employed  the  measured  pressure  at  the  PMMA 
plate  can  be  converted  to  the  pressure  at  the 
detonation  front  by  impedance  matching  method. 
The  peak  pressures  at  detonation  front  were 
estimated  3.3  and  2.9  GPa  respectively.    Those 
pressure  values  are  plotted  in  Fig.  9  by  square 
Figure 9  shows  the pressure-specific volume 
plane  for  consideration  of  the  state  quantities  in 
reaction zone for ANAC mixture. To calculate the 
state  quantities  at  the  reaction  zone  the  partially 
reacted state have frequently treated as the simple 
mixture of the reactant and detonation products. 
Fig.  9.  Pressure-specific  volume  plan 
consideration of the state quantities in the reaction 
zone  for  ANAC  mixture  7  wt  AC.  The 
partially  reacted  lines  were  plotted  from  0.99  to 
0.09 for mass fraction of the inert reactant. 
In  Fig.9  the  partially  reacted  state  has  estimated 
by two phases of the isentropic line which passing 
through the C-J point for detonation products and 
the  Hugoniot  centered  at 
Unfortunately  there  was  no  published  Hugoniot 
data  for  corresponding  initial  density.  The  the 
Hugoniot  for  0.83  gcc  initial  density19  was  used 
as inert component.  
The path of the state quantities for non-ideal 
detonation wave and that of ZND model might be 
different.  The  estimated  peak  pressure  is  not 
attenuation  behind  the  detonation  front  is  small 
the  estimated  pressures  were  plotted  on  the 
Rayleigh  line.  The  pressure  at  the  sonic  plane  is 
located close to the estimated pressure at the P-V 
plane. Although not the exact concept the reactive 
lines were drawn from 0.99 to 0.09 with 0.1 of the 
interval in Fig. 9.  If the pressure at the sonic plane 
can  be  estimated  by  tangent  point  between  the 
Rayleigh line for the 3.2 kms and the reactive line 
the pressure value is 2.5 GPa at the sonic plane.  
When the inner diameters were 10.3 and 57.3 
the  corresponding  detonation  velocity 
obtained by steel tube test were 2.5 and 3.7 kms 
respectively. By combination with the velocity and 
pressure  measurements  the  same  consideration 
mentioned  above  can  be  perform 
equation of state for partially reacted state may be 
constructed based on the experimental data.  
The  size  effect  curves  for  an  ammonium 
AN  and  AN-base  explosive  were 
discussed based on the steel tube test. The samples 
were  mixtures  of  the  AN  and  activated  carbon 
AC.  The  effects  of  the  size  confinement  and 
composition  on  the  detonation  velocity  were 
clarified  and  the  size  effect  curves  for  various 
compositions  were  summarized  by  empirical 
equation.  The  pressure  measurements  by  the 
PVDF gauge were also conducted in the steel tube 
test with 35.5 mm inner diameter for the mixture 
of  7wt    AC.  The  partially  reacted  state  was 
estimated by two phases of the detonation products 
and  the  Hugoniot  and  the  measured  pressures 
were investigated with partially reacted state in PV  plane.  The  pressure  at  the  sonic  plane  was The instability of detonation waves for nitromethane and FEFO 
V. Mochalova A. Utkin S. Torunov S. Koldunov 
Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics RAS 
Chernogolovka Russia 142432 
Abstract. Using a laser interferometer VISAR and streak camera the experimental study 
of  stability  of  detonation  waves  in  nitromethane  NM  and  FEFO  was  conducted.  It  is 
shown that the correlation between different types of instabilities of the detonation front 
in liquid high explosives is not strictly determinate. It is possible both the existence of 
waves of failure of reaction at steady-state detonation front no cellular structure and the 
absence of waves of reaction failure at unstable detonation front. 
In  liquid  high  explosives  HE  detonation 
waves  propagate  both  in  a  steady-state  and  an 
unstable  regime.  Realization  of  a  particular 
nature of the flow is determined primarily by the 
kinetics  of  chemical  reaction.  It  is  necessary  to 
distinguish  the  instability  of  one-dimensional 
flow  which  realizes  at  the  lack  of  boundary 
influence  and  the  instability  on  the  edge  of 
charge  wave  of  failure  of  reaction123.  The 
instability  of  the  first  type  is  investigated  in 
structure  of  the  detonation  wave  is  considered 
in which the original HE does not react in shock 
jump in a time equal to the period of induction 
and then instantly goes to the final state145. This 
flow is unstable with respect to small transverse 
perturbations  if  the  ratio  of  the  activation 
energy to the temperature behind the shock jump 
exceeds  a  critical  value.  At  that  the  character 
wavelength  of  perturbations  is  proportional  to 
the  width  of  the  chemical  reaction  zone.  The 
consequence  of  this  type  of  instability  is  the 
the  cellular  structure  of 
instability  of  non-one-dimensional 
flow  occurring  in  the  detonation  wave  on  the 
edge of charge is investigated to a lesser degree. 
The most significant contribution to the study of 
this  phenomenon  was  made  by  Dremin  and 
others  see for  example  the  monograph6. The 
existence  of  the  wave  of  failure  of  reaction 
changes fundamentally the physical nature of the 
critical diameter. As shown in work6 the critical 
diameter  in  this  case  is  determined  by  the 
induction  period  of  thermal  explosion  at  the 
edge of the charge but not the reaction time of 
the  detonation  wave  as  it  occurs  in  the  stable 
Both types of instability are caused by the 
same  reasons mutual  influence  of  dynamics  of 
flow  and  rate  of  chemical  reaction  together. 
Therefore  it  may  seem  naturally  that  either  a 
detonation  front  must  be  steady  or  a  cellular 
structure  and  wave  of  reaction  failure  must  be 
numerous  studies  of  various 
explosives confirm this fact. And it is clear that 
the  conditions  of  the  flow  in  the  center  and  on 
the edge of the charge are significantly different 
and  conditions  of  the  loss  of  stability  do  not 
need to be hold along the entire front. The aim 
of  this  work  is  to  prove  that  the  correlation 
between  these  two  types  of  instability  is  not 
obtained  for  specific HE  show  both possibility 
of  the  existence  of  waves  of  reaction  failure  at 
the  steady-state  detonation  front  when  cellular 
structure is absent and the absence of waves of 
reaction failure at unstable detonation front. 
determinate.  Experimental 
Objects  of  investigation  are  bis-2-fluoro22-dinitroethyl-formal  FEFO  5H6N4O10F2 
and  nitromethane  NM.  Recording  of 
detonation  waves  structure  was  carried  out  by 
the  laser  interferometer  VISAR  and  streak 
The scheme of experiments 
In  experiments  the  liquid  high  explosives 
were investigated FEFO with the initial density of 
1.60  gcm3  89  and  nitromethane  with  the  initial 
density of 1.14 gcm3. The scheme of experiments 
is  shown  in  Fig.  1.  HE  charge  was  placed  in  the 
polyethylene  shell  the  internal  diameter  4  of 
which changed from 8 mm to 46 mm. The charge 
length  was  150  mm.  The  initiation  of  detonation 
was  made  by  the  pressed  charge  of  RDX  1.  A 
laser  beam  was  reflected  from  7  m  Al  foil  3 
which  was  placed  between  charge  end  and  water 
Fig. 1. The scheme of experiments. 
The  results  of  the  experiments  are  the 
velocity profiles of the foil  water border which 
represent all details of the reaction zone structure 
the  detonation  wave.  The 
constant  is  equal  to  305  ms  it  allows  for  the 
definition of the velocity with the accuracy of 10 
ms. At the same time in each experiment with the 
use  of  the  ionization  gauge  5  the  detonation 
velocity  D  was  measured.  The  second  time  point 
was the interferometer signal which recorded the 
arrival  of  the  detonation  wave  to  the  boundary 
determination  of  the  detonation  velocity  was  not 
worse than 0.2 it was about 0.01 kms. 
The measured velocity profiles for FEFO at a 
different diameters of the charge are shown in Fig. 
2.  The  dependence  of  velocity  on  time  is  well 
reproduced from the experiment to experiment and 
for  comparable  diameters  coincides  with  the 
results of  9. The presence of strong oscillations of 
velocity both in the chemical reaction zone and in 
the  unloading  wave  with 
the  characteristic 
amplitude  of  about  50  ms  is  the  most  striking 
feature  of  the  obtained  dependences.  A  clearly 
defined  period  of  oscillation  is  absent  but  the 
order  of  magnitude  is  about  50  ns.  It  means  that 
heterogeneities size is comparable to the thickness 
of the foil that is about 10 microns. The character 
of the instability is not related to the influence of 
the  boundary  of  charge.  It  is  confirmed  by  the 
immutability of the qualitative view of the velocity 
profiles  at  diameter  change  more  than  five  times 
Fig. 2. I.e. in FEFO the cellular structure of the 
detonation front is realized. It should be noted that 
the observed instability is quite unexpected since 
in  the  powerful  liquid  HE  like  FEFO  the 
detonation is considered to be stable. 
the  oscillating  character  of 
dependences  shown  in  Fig.  2  the  averaged 
velocity profiles correspond to the classical model 
of  detonation  after  the  shock  jump  the  drop  of 
velocity with the formation of Von Neumann spike 
in  the  reaction  zone  is  observed.  Moreover  the 
transition from the reaction zone to the unloading 
wave is smooth and it is difficult to determine the 
position of Chapman-Jouguet point. 
However  a  comparison  of 
profiles  obtained  for  different  diameters  of  the 
charges allows doing it with high accuracy if the 
experimental  conditions  ensure  the  constancy  of 
the flow in the reaction zone. 
transition  from  tube  to  volume  was  carried  out 
by a streak camera. 
Fig. 2. The velocity of FEFO  water boundary at 
different diameters of polypropylene shell 1  46 
mm 2  14.5 mm 3  8 mm. 
In this case this method is applicable since 
the  detonation  velocity  within  the  measurement 
error remains almost constant at the decreasing of 
charge diameter the critical value of which is less 
than 8 mm. The comparison of dependencies 1 and 
2 in Fig. 2 which correspond to the diameters of 
46 and 14.5 mm respectively shows that they are 
close at times smaller 0.3 microseconds and only 
then begin to diverge markedly. I.e. the results are 
consistent  with  those  of  9  in  which  the  reaction 
time was defined as 350  50 ns and the pressure 
and particle velocity at the Chapman-Jouguet point 
were  equal  to  23.9    0.5  GPa  and  1.98    0.05 
According to current opinion in addition to 
the detonation  front  instability in FEFO waves 
of  failure  of  reaction  must  be  observed.  For 
investigation of this phenomenon the scheme of 
experiment shown in Fig.3 was used. HE was 
placed  in  glass  tube  3.  When  coming  out  of 
detonation to the tube of larger diameter 5 the 
detonation will peter out if the tube diameter 3 
is less than the critical diameter without a shell 
in  the  other  case  it  will  propagate  under  all 
volume of the tube 5 6. At that the view of the 
boundary  which  separates  the  detonation  wave 
and  non-reacting  HE  depends  on  absence  or 
presence waves of failure of reaction in the first 
case  the  boundary  of  the  detonation  front  is 
smooth  in  the  second    zigzag  pattern  6.  The 
recording  of  the  process  of  the  detonation 
Fig. 3. The scheme of experiment. The coming 
out  of  detonation  in  FEFO  from  the  tube  to 
volume. 1  booster explosive 2  PMMA plate 
3    glass  tube  4    FEFO  5    volume  6   
The  result  of  the  experiment  is  shown  in 
Fig.4.  When  coming  out  the  tube  of  large 
diameter the detonation fills full volume. First of 
all  it  means  that  the  internal  diameter  of  the 
tube 3 which is equal to 11 mm exceeds the 
critical one for FEFO. Secondly the boundary of 
the  propagation  of  the  detonation  wave  is 
smooth  without  any  characteristics  of  existing 
of waves of reaction failure. 
Fig. 4. The streak image of detonation front light 
in  FEFO  in  experiment  the  scheme  of  which  is 
shown  in  Fig.3.  Arrow  is  the  moment  of  coming 
out of detonation from the tube to volume. 
Thus  FEFO  is  an  example  of  liquid  HE  in 
which the waves of failure of reaction on the edge 
of charge are absent at marked cellular structure of 
Nitromethane  is  one  of  the  most  studied 
liquid HE. It is considered that the detonation front 
in  it  is  unstable.  However  it  was  proved  the 
existence  of  a  cellular  detonation  front  only  in 
mixtures of nitromethane with inert diluents 6. The 
instability  of  neat  nitromethane  is  not  observed 
clearly.  Only  on  the  basis  of  the  interpretation of 
experiments  on  the  registration  of  light  reflection 
from the detonation front the conclusion about its 
instability  was  made  6.  In  this  work  which  is  a 
continuation  of  previously  initiated  studies10  the 
attempt to prove the stability of detonation waves 
in nitromethane is made. 
The scheme of experiments is the same as in 
the case of FEFO Fig. 1. Fig. 5 shows the results 
of experiments for charges of different diameters. 
Solid  line  1  shows  the  velocity  profile  for  the 
charge diameter of 36 mm. After the shock jump 
the  sharp  drop  of  velocity  with  the  formation  of 
Von  Neumann  spike  in  the  reaction  zone  is 
observed  which  gradually 
unloading  wave.  The  dependence  of  velocity  on 
time is smooth without any oscillations that could 
be  connected  with  the  instability  of  the  flow.  It 
means that either the detonation front is stable in 
nitromethane  or  the  perturbation  amplitude  is 
considerably smaller than the thickness of the foil 
which on the order of a micron. 
The  latest  assumption  is  consistent  with  the 
interpretation of experiments on the registration of 
the light reflection from the detonation front 6 but 
against  it  there  are  a  number  of  arguments  the 
main of which is the fact that the lack of reflection 
of  light  from  the  wave  front  is  not  unambiguous 
proof  of  its  instability.  To  a  similar  effect  may 
result  for  example  a  sharp  increase  in  the 
concentration of active particles whose absorption 
spectrum  overlaps  with  the  emission  spectrum  of 
the  probe.  In  detail  the  opportunity  of  realization 
of  this  mechanism  will  be  considered  when 
discussing  the  results.  The  experimental  data 
suggest that the cellular structure of the detonation 
front in nitromethane is absent i.e. it is smooth. 
Fig.  5  also  shows  the  velocity  profile  2 
obtained at diameter of charge of 20 mm. Particle 
velocity decreases both in the reaction zone and in 
unloading  wave  and  on  the  velocity  profile  the 
noticeable oscillations appear. This is explained by 
the  proximity  of  20  mm  diameter  to  a  critical 
value. The oscillations are caused not by the loss 
of stability of the front resulting in the formation 
of a cellular structure but the approaching of the 
waves of failure of reaction to the center of charge. 
The fact of existence of this type of instability in 
NM was proved experimentally 6. In this work the 
waves  of  failure  of  reaction  were  observed  by  a 
scheme  shown  in  Fig.  6.  The  propagation  of  a 
detonation wave in nitromethane was recorded by 
a streak camera. HE was placed in a polypropylene 
shell 2 with an internal diameter of 36 mm and a 
Fig.  5.  The  velocity  of  nitromethane    water 
boundary  at  different  diameters  of  polypropylene 
shell  1    36  mm  2    20  mm  3    36  mm  for 
nitromethaneDETA solution 0.9950.005. 
Fig. 6. The scheme of experiment. 1  booster 
explosive 2  tube with nitromethane 3  mirror. 
The obtained photo-recordings of the process 
are shown in Fig. 7. It is seen from the photo for 
nitromethane that the boundary of the charge is not 
smooth waves of failure of reaction are generated 
regularly  at  the  side  surface  and  extend  to  the 
center on  the depth  reaching  a  half  of  the radius. 
With  decreasing  of  charge  diameter  this  distance 
perturbation of the flow in the center of the charge. 
This  phenomenon  causes  the  velocity  oscillations 
in the profile 2 in Fig. 5. 
Thus nitromethane is an example of a liquid 
HE  in  which  the  instability  appears  as  waves  of 
failure  of  reaction  on  the  edge  of  the  charge 
whereas the detonation front in the central part of 
charge remains stable. 
Fig. 7. The streak image of light of the detonation 
Discussion of results 
Obtained  results  show  both  the  existence  of 
waves  of  failure  of  reaction  at  steady-state 
detonation  front  no  cellular  structure  and  the 
absence  of  waves  of  reaction  failure  at  unstable 
detonation front. The instability of the first type is 
quite obvious since the pressure and temperature 
on the edge of charge is lower than in the center. 
This  may  result  in  that  at  the  specific  kinetics  of 
decomposition  of  HE  the  detonation  front  on  the 
central part of the charge is stable but not on the 
edge  of  charge  and  as  result  of  this  there  is  the 
appearance  of  the  waves  of  reaction  failure.  This 
phenomenon  is  observed  in  nitromethane.  The 
assumption  about  the  formation  of  a  cellular 
it  with  a  characteristic  size  of 
inhomogeneities about micron as noted above is 
based on the interpretation of experiments with the 
reflection of light from the detonation front 6. But 
in this case the absence of reflected light is  most 
intermediate  reaction  products  of  nitromethane  in 
the shock front which absorb radiation. 
Indeed  the  reaction  of  decomposition  of 
nitromethane  is  autocatalytic  the  rate  of  which 
increases  with  the  increasing  of  concentration  of 
the  intermediate  active  particles.  Unambiguous 
evidence  of  a  particular  way  of  reaction  of 
nitromethane under detonation is absent although 
lot  of  different  hypotheses 
considered1112.  Nevertheless  it  is  arguable  that 
their  threshold  concentration  after  which  the 
reaction is accelerated sharply is reached in shock 
jump. The character of the dependences of particle 
velocity on the time is the evidenced of it. Fig. 5 
curve  1  shows  that  the  maximum  velocity 
gradient and hence the maximum rate of reaction 
is  realized  directly  behind 
Therefore  the  formation  of  activated  complexes 
occurred directly in shock wave front. Moreover it 
is  shown  experimentally  that  the  initiation  of  the 
chemical  reaction  in  nitromethane  at  17  GPa 
results in a total absorption of light in the visible 
part of the spectrum 12. 
The results of experiments on the influence of 
diethylenetriamine CH2CH2NH22NH DETA on 
detonation properties of nitromethane confirm the 
determinative  role  of  activated  complexes  on  the 
kinetics of decomposition and optical properties of 
nitromethane under detonation. 
is  more  obviously  at 
Low  concentrations  of  amines  lead  to  the 
formation of the active particles which determine 
the  first  stage  of  the  autocatalytic  reaction  of 
nitromethane  decomposition  12  already  in  the 
initial  state  of  the  mixture.  At  that  the  optical 
properties  of  the  solution  NMDETA  change 
registration of light of the detonation front. Fig. 8 
detonation  wave  propagation  in  a  mixture  of 
NMDETA  99.50.5  obtained  in  the  same  setting 
as in the neat NM Fig. 7. The bright glow of the 
detonation  front  in  the  neat  nitromethane  is 
the  moment  of  detonation 
initiation.  The  presence  of  a  thick  layer  of  nonreactive  nitromethane  greater  than  10  cm  at  the 
initial  moment  doesnt  cause  the  significant 
absorption of radiation. It is explained by the lack 
of  active  particles  in  the  original  HE.  Their 
appearance in the shock wave front probably leads 
to  the  partial  absorption  of  the  radiation  but  its 
portion  remains  constant  and  does  not  cause  the 
changes  of  the  light  intensity  as  the  detonation 
the  all  recording 
analyzed in detail in work 9. Authors 9 showed that 
nitrobenzene  added  to  FEFO  the  stabilization  of 
the detonation front was observed. It appears in the 
disappearance  of  oscillations  on  the  velocity 
profiles  while  it  would  be  expected  the  greater 
development  of  the  instability.  At  the  same  time 
about twice as compared with the neat FEFO the 
amplitude  of  Von  Neumann  spike  increases  and 
the  velocity  gradient  in  the  reaction  zone  rises. 
Such  an  unusual  character  of  change  of  the 
reaction zone structure is due to partial reaction of 
HE  directly  in  the  shock  wave  front.  Moreover 
due to the high initial rate of reaction in FEFO the 
portion of decomposition may be quite high. When 
adding nitrobenzene the initial rate of reaction and 
hence  the  amount  of  reacted  HE  in  the  front  is 
reduced  and  fast  stage  of  reaction  moves  to  the 
The  decrease  of  pressure  and  temperature  at 
approaching to the edge of the charge in this case 
results in the same effect as the addition of an inert 
dilution to FEFO the fraction of HE decomposed 
in the shock wave front is reduced but the rate of 
chemical  reaction  behind  the  shock  jump  may 
even  increase.  As  a  result  the  conditions  of 
formation  of  waves  of  reaction  failure  are  not 
reached. It should be noted that the criteria for loss 
of stability of the detonation front which appears 
in the cellular structure in this case no longer valid 
because  they  were  obtained  without  taking  into 
account of the reaction in the front 45. 
Thus it is shown that the correlation between 
different  types  of  instabilities  of  the  detonation 
front in liquid HE is not strictly determinate. Grain scale simulations of pore collapse and chemical reaction in shock-loaded
Ryan A. Austin Nathan R. Barton John E. Reaugh Laurence E. Fried
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA
Abstract. The formation of hot spots is critical to the shock wave initiation of heterogeneous high explosive materials. Hot spots are formed for example when micron-sized
pores contained within energetic crystals are collapsed under shock wave loading. In this
work a numerical model is used to simulate pore collapse and chemical reactions in shockloaded -HMX crystal. The model accounts for i anisotropic time-dependent mechanical
responses of the crystalline phase ii crystal melting due to localized deformation and
iii temperature-driven decomposition reactions. For a baseline set of model parameters
the simulations predict a modest extent of reaction over a nanosecond time scale. However
relatively small increases in the assumed viscosity of the liquid phase lead to signicant
increases in reactivity due to intensied dissipation in shear banding regions.
The shock wave initiation of heterogeneous high
explosive HE materials is known to be controlled
by localized regions of elevated temperature i.e.
hot spots 1 2. The hot spots are generated for
example by interaction of the shock wave with material defects. Microscopic pores contained within
HE crystals or among aggregates of crystals have
long been considered as sources for the hot spots
needed to trigger rapid chemical reactions under
shock wave loading. Therefore descriptions of
shock wave ignition are typically linked to pore closure. However a fundamental understanding of the
ignition process is still lacking as precise localization mechanisms microstructure dependencies and
ignition time scales are largely unknown.
To improve our understanding of the shock wave
initiation of HE crystals there is a need to resolve
the dissipative processes that give rise to hot spots
and subsequent chemical responses in those regions.
Given the difculty of accessing relevant time and
length scales by experimental methods we have
pursued a computational approach. In this regard
a numerical model has been developed to simulate the shock initiation of porous -HMX crystal.
The model is unique in that it accounts for i the
crystal mechanics i.e. anisotropic thermoelasticviscoplastic responses of the crystalline phase and
ii decomposition reactions that are driven by the
local temperature. The model is used to study the
collapse of a single pore contained in a crystal that
is shock-loaded up to about 10 GPa. The reactivity of the sample is quantied over a post-collapse
simulation time of a few nanoseconds a time scale
that is short but relevant to the early stages of ignition. A small parametric study is then undertaken
to assess the model sensitivity to initial crystal orientation and the viscosity of molten HMX.
The most stable phase of HMX at standard pressure and temperature is the  phase.
phase exhibits monoclinic crystal symmetry and can
be represented in either of two equivalent space
groups P 21n or P 21c with two molecules per
unit cell 3. All crystal quantities are referenced
to the P 21c space group in this work. In the following we describe a material model that has been
developed to address the ignition of -HMX crystal
by shock wave loading.
Let us begin by considering the decomposition
chemistry. A number of multi-step reaction pathways have been proposed for the thermal initiation
of -HMX by slow heating processes 46. However the reaction path that is followed under shock
wave loading which involves high pressures and
short time scales is largely unknown. Given this
uncertainty we have adopted a single-step global
reaction. The reaction addresses the decomposition
of both - and liquid-phase HMX i.e.
In this scheme the chemical species to be tracked
are HMX liquid and product gas. The reaction rate is taken to be rst-order with respect to
the HMX species and the Arrhenius kinetic parameters of Henson et al. 6 are utilized i.e. an activation energy of Ea  149 kJmol and a frequency
factor of k0  5.61012 s1. Although the singlestep reaction is a simplication of the actual chemistry it is sufcient to describe a wide range of
experimentally-measured ignition times including
observations relevant to the shock ignition of HMX crystal 6. Future efforts may consider both
multi-step reactions and nal products that contain
water vapor instead of free oxygen.
With the reaction path and kinetics in hand the
various components of the the material model may
now be formulated. The thermoelastic-viscoplastic
responses of the  phase are handled using a crystal model that was developed in previous work
7. The crystal model makes use of a Murnaghan
equation-of-state EOS and a dislocation density
based strength law. In this framework the plastic
deformation of the crystal phase occurs by the mo
tion of dislocations on specic slip systems. Selected properties that are used to simulate the 
phase are given in Table 1. These properties are
reported at standard temperature and pressure. To
allow for crystal melting a compression-dependent
melt energy curve is dened. As the material progresses through the melting phase transformation a
mixture rule is used to compute the deviatoric responses of the solidliquid mixture. Here the liquid
phase is modeled as a viscous Newtonian uid. The
liquid viscosity is taken to be constant and equal to
the value computed from atomistic simulations performed at 800 K and 1 atm i.e. 5.5 cP 8. The
reference density and EOS of the liquid phase are
taken to be identical to that of the  phase and
the enthalpy of melting is neglected. This is done
purely for expediency and it is recognized that rened treatments of the liquid phase would improve
the model. The heat capacities of the  and liquid
phases again assumed equivalent are formulated
as functions of temperature to improve the accuracy of computed temperatures. Further discussion
of material properties needed to simulate the shock
wave loading and ignition of HMX is available in
The decomposition chemistry is handled by the
thermochemical code Cheetah 10. The material
model interrogates the Cheetah code i to evolve
the species concentrations based on the prescribed
reaction kinetics and the thermodynamic state and
ii to compute the pressure and temperature of a
multi-phase material point liquidgas based on
its density internal energy and composition. The
conversion of liquid HMX to product gas involves an exothermic heat release of 4198 Jg.
Numerical simulation of pore collapse
Pore collapse in shock-loaded HE materials has
been considered in previous computational efforts.
For example continuum mechanics based models have been constructed to study aggregates of
HMX grains under dynamic loading 1113 and
the shock-induced closure of a single pore contained in HMX 714 and TATB 15. The progress
of the current model is the inclusion of the crystal
mechanics and decomposition chemistry.
To simulate shock wave propagation a numerical model was constructed using the multi-physics
Table 1. Selected properties that are used to simulate the  phase given at standard temperature and
Melt temperature  Tm0 K
Heat of formation  h0f
nite element code ALE3D. The simulations were
performed in 2D plane strain to allow for tractable
computations. Here the computational domain is
rendered by inserting a single pore near the center of a rectangular slab of -HMX crystal. The
pore is cylindrical in shape and lled with ambient air. Two-dimensional axisymmetric simulations
for spherical pores were not considered because
the crystal lattice does not display this symmetry.
Although full 3D calculations are certainly desirable for both cylindrical and spherical pores we believe such calculations are premature at this stage of
A shock wave is generated by prescribing the axial component of velocity on the left-hand surface
of the crystal slab. The prescribed material velocity
rises instantaneously similar to conditions imposed
at the impact surface in a plate impact experiment.
The top and bottom surfaces of the crystal sample
are periodic and the right-hand surface is restrained
by a rigid frictionless wall. The initial dislocation
density eld of the crystal is not uniform but rather
randomly distributed in space to provide a more realistic description of the microstructure on the computational mesh cf. Ref. 7. A mesh size of 8 nm
was needed to converge the results of interest.
The real viscosity of the material is augmented by
an articial viscosity in these computations. This is
done to spread out the shock front when the material model predicts close to zero dissipation. Such
is the case for extremely sharp velocity gradients
where the viscoplastic strength model predicts negligible amounts of plastic shearing on very short
time scales and therefore large elastic deformations. Transients in the wave structure give rise to
entropy errors when a numerical viscosity is used
as part of the shock capturing scheme 16. These
transients occur when a shock wave interacts with a
material boundary or with other shock waves. The
entropy errors take the form of an excess energy often called wall heating 17 and a decit in density. These errors require consideration because we
are interested in computing temperature elds about
a collapsing pore. An estimate of this excess heating effect will be given in the following section.
There is a large parameter space that can be studied with respect to modeling intragranular pore collapse. We have conducted a study by constructing a reference case and then perturbing that reference case to investigate various effects. In previous
work 18 we reported on the sensitivity of the calculations to stress wave amplitude. In the following
we consider the effects of initial crystal orientation
and the viscosity of molten HMX.
The reference case involves a pore diameter of
1 m a velocity boundary condition of 1 kms
which generates a plateau stress of 9.4 GPa and
a crystal orientation that is obtained as follows the
normal vector of the 111 plane is aligned with the
shock direction x-axis the crystal is then rotated
about the shock direction until the 110 direction
forms an angle of  with the y-axis. To allow for
comparison with previous work 7 the angle of rotation was selected as   38.8. The reference
case simulations are locally adiabatic. The adiabatic case was simulated because the thermal diffusion distance in HMX is very small about 10 nm
for the time scale under consideration a few ns.
Furthermore the adiabatic simulations are meant
to serve as a baseline against which future calculations which include heat conduction may be compared.
The reference case was considered in our previous work 18. As the shock wave collapses the
pore jets of liquid-HMX are injected into the pore
space while shear bands grow out of the pore collapse region. This shear banding behavior is il
862
Fig. 1. The simulated temperature eld for the reference case plotted on a logarithmic scale. The shock
wave direction is from left to right. This snapshot was taken at a time of 2.6 ns after the shock wave arrived at
the pore. The narrow bands of elevated temperature are shear bands that have grown out of the pore collapse
lustrated in Fig. 1. The shear bands are a result of localized deformation and their orientations
tend to follow that of specic crystallographic slip
planes e.g. the 011 and 102 planes as shown
in Fig. 1. The dissipated work in the shear banding
regions is sufcient to melt the crystal. Therefore
the shear bands may be viewed as melt cracks.
As mentioned earlier entropy errors are generated by shock wave interactions. To quantify this
effect the excess heating at the left-hand boundary was considered. The boundary temperature is
105 K higher than the plateau temperature found
a few mesh lengths away from the left-hand side.
This provides an estimate of the entropy error due
to articial viscosity when the crystal is driven by a
rigid piston at 1 kms. The same level of error is expected for the impact of one crystal slab traveling
at 2 kms onto another crystal slab that is stationary. The latter problem is similar to the impact of
a liquid-HMX jet on the downstream surface of the
pore. Therefore the temperatures generated by jet
impact are likely too high by about 100 K at the
pore surface. Although the entropy errors are unfortunate they are somewhat unavoidable given the
shock capturing methods employed in modern hydrocodes.
In the pore collapse region near the center of
Fig. 1 a hot spot temperature of about 5000 K
is present. This hot spot has been generated by
mechanical work and exothermic heat release from
chemical reaction. In the reference case the only
region that undergoes reaction is that which immediately surrounds the collapsed pore as the shear
bands do not reach high enough temperatures.
The reactivity of the sample is quantied by the
relative mass of products  which is dened as
the total mass of product phase divided by the pore
mass i.e. the reference mass of crystal that would
t inside the initial pore. When considering the
shock initiation of porous HE systems a commonly
used ignition criterion is   1. The product curve
for the reference case 9.4 GPa is plotted in Fig. 2
Product curves for the reference case
9.4 GPa and crystal samples that were simulated
at lower and higher stress wave amplitudes.
along with product curves simulated at lower and
higher stress wave amplitudes 18. Here and in
the remainder of this article times are given relative to the arrival of the shock front at the left-hand
upstream side of the pore.
Effects of crystal orientation
The sensitivity of the pore collapse model to crystal orientation was investigated by varying the angle
of twist about the shock axis . All other aspects
of the reference case remained the same. Although
the shock wave direction is still normal to the 111
plane the cylindrical pore axis is now reoriented
with respect to the crystal lattice. In addition to the
reference case   38.8 twist angles of 0 and
The temperature eld for each of the new crystal
orientations is plotted in Fig. 3. These elds may
be compared to the temperature eld for the reference case in Fig. 1. As shown in Fig. 3 the initial
crystal orientation has some effect on the shear band
patterning. This is because the crystallographic slip
planes rotate with the crystal. In all cases the shear
bands tend to form on the slip planes that are subjected to the largest shear stresses i.e. those oriented about 45 away from the shock loading direction.
Although the computed temperature elds reveal
some subtle differences e.g. the 0-case exhibits
less crack branching and fewer closely spaced melt
cracks when compared to the other orientations
the overall localization behavior does not appear
to exhibit a strong dependence on crystal orientation when loading normal to 111. This is conrmed by the sample temperature histograms plotted in Fig. 4 which show similar temperature distributions among each of the orientations. These histograms were constructed by binning the mass of
a sample according to temperature and normalizing
the bins by the pore mass. The high-temperature
tails of the histograms  2000 K correspond to regions that are partially or fully reacted. As shown
in Fig. 5 the overall reactivity of each orientation is
more-or-less the same on this time scale.
Effects of liquid viscosity
As mentioned earlier the pore collapse simulations predict the formation of shear bands that are
lled with liquid-HMX. We now consider the sensitivity of the model to the viscosity of the liquid phase. The viscosity of liquid-HMX has been
computed in atomistic simulations that were performed at ambient pressure and temperatures ranging from 550 K initial melting to 800 K 8.
was shown that the liquid viscosity conforms to the
following relation   0 expTaT  where 0
 3.1104 cP and Ta  7800 K. In the reference
case a viscosity of 5.5 cP was utilized which corresponds to a liquid temperature of about 800 K. The
liquid viscosity is now increased to 22.0 cP which
corresponds to a liquid temperature of about 700 K.
All other aspects of the reference case remain unchanged.
When the viscosity of the liquid phase is increased the shock-loaded crystal samples exhibit
higher reactivity in the pore collapse region and
the shear bands. This is illustrated by the product
curves given in Fig. 6. The initial trajectory of the
product curve is controlled by reactions that occur
in the uidized pore collapse region near the center
of the sample. As shown in Fig. 6 the case with
higher viscosity is more reactive over the rst 2 ns
of compression due to higher temperatures around
the collapsed pore. At about 2 ns there is a signicant increase in the overall reaction rate. This
increased rate of product formation is due to the occurrence of reactions in a few of the shear bands. In
this case the dissipated work renders some shear
bands hot enough to react on a nanosecond time
scale. Thus the model is quite sensitive to the vis
864
 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3relative mass of productstime ns6.5 GPa9.4 GPa10.7 GPaFig. 3. The shear band patterning that is predicted for various initial crystal orientations. The images in the
bottom row depict the initial orientation of the crystal lattice for shock loading normal to the 111 plane
indicated by the vertical plane in the gure and twist angles of 0and 90. The corresponding temperature
elds are plotted in the top row. The temperature scale is given in Fig. 1.
Fig. 4. Temperature histograms computed for various twist angles about the shock direction. The midpoints of the bins are plotted as closed symbols.
Fig. 5. Product curves for the various orientations
illustrate that the simulated reactivity is relatively
insensitive to twist angle when loading normal to
  0o  90o1 m 0.0001 0.001 0.01 0.1 1 10 100 1000 10000relative masstemperature K-38.8090 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3relative mass of productstime ns-38.8090Fig. 6. Product curves for the reference case and the
case with higher liquid viscosity. The rather sharp
increase in overall reaction rate for the higher viscosity case corresponds to the onset of reactions in
shear banding regions of the sample.
cosity of the liquid phase.
Summary and conclusions
A numerical model has been used to study the
shock wave initiation of porous -HMX crystal.
The model calculations which are situated at the
length scale of individual HE grains focus on resolving hot spots generated by the collapse of intragranular pores and the attendant chemical reactions
To obtain a baseline set of results for pore collapse in -HMX crystal a reference case was considered. The reference case involved a 1-m diameter pore shock loading normal to 111 and a peak
stress of 9.4 GPa. The reference case yielded a modest extent of reaction   0.1 for a post-collapse
simulation time of a few nanoseconds. These calculations also revealed the importance of shear localization as a deformation mode of the defective crystal. The shear bands which are lled with molten
HMX tend to propagate along crystal planes that
are well-oriented for slip.
Simulations were then performed to assess the
sensitivity of the model to initial crystal orientation
and the viscosity of the liquid-HMX phase. For
loading normal to 111 the simulated reactivity
was relatively insensitive to changes in twist angle
about the shock direction. It remains to be seen if
this result holds for shocks propagated normal to
other crystal planes. On the other hand the model
predictions of reactivity are quite sensitive to the
viscosity of the liquid phase. When the liquid viscosity is increased from 5.5 cP to 22.0 cP the overall
reactivity increases rather sharply due to the occurrence of decomposition reactions in the shear bands.
Shock wave ignition is nearly achieved for the sample with higher liquid viscosity as   0.8 on this
In consideration of these results future modeling work should seek to develop more accurate
treatments of the liquid phase EOS and viscosity.
A relatively straight-forward extension of the current model would be to incorporate the aforementioned temperature-dependent viscosity 8 in the
uid constitutive model. Data on the pressure dependence of the liquid viscosity are also wanted
as these simulations involve pressures on the order
of 10 GPa. Finally techniques for extending the
shock simulation time beyond a few nanoseconds
are needed at which point heat transfer away from
the hot spots should be addressed.
This work performed under the auspices of the
U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DEAC52-07NA27344 LLNL-CONF-656818.Reduced Chemistry Implicit Equations of State 
for Explosion and Detonation Products 
Martin Braithwaiteand Gary J. Sharpe  
Cavendish Laboratory 
University of Cambridge Cambridge CB2 0HE UK 
Blue Dog Scientific Ltd 
Greenside South Yorkshire S75 6AU UK 
Abstract.  Reduced  chemistry  implicit  equations  of  state  EoS  that  describe  the 
thermodynamics  of  detonation  and  explosion  products  are  in  common  use  in  finite 
element and compressible fluid dynamic computer codes. These EoS are primarily used 
to describe the isentropic and near isentropic behaviour of these products in terms of an 
energy-density-pressure 
relation  where  a  chemistry  explicit  EoS  would  be 
computationally too expensive. For high explosives and their applications the JWL EoS 
is in frequent use and its parameters can be routinely determined by matching cylinder 
test data. Where these data are not available or attainable fits to isentropes determined 
by ideal detonation computer analysis can be used. For some applications the JWL EoS 
is  not  well  suited  due  to  its  anomalous  derivatives  negative  sound  speed  and 
assumptions regarding constant heat capacity and Gruneisen Gamma. Alternatives based 
on  pseudo-polytropic  or  other  simplified  forms  have  also  some  limitations.  The 
Williamsburg  EoS  was  developed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  representing  the 
detonation product thermodynamics of non-ideal explosives and in addition to provide 
correct asymptotic behaviour high and low density smooth derivatives Gruneisen and 
Adiabatic Gammas and avoid singularities. The Williamsburg EoS affords an advantage 
over tabular EoS as it provides a continuous function without the need for interpolation. 
It  has  been  favourable  compared  with  the  JWL  EoS  and  has  a  statistical  mechanical 
basis. Occasionally it has been found that the Williamsburg EoS in its original form can 
give  rise  to  singularities  when  this  EoS  is  used  over  an  extended  density  domain. 
Alternative  basis  functions  to  the  rational  polynomials  originally  published  have  now 
been developed which circumvent this problem. The products EoS has been used for the 
basis  of  a  full  EoS  treatment  for  ANFO  and  emulsion  explosives.  Results  in  terms  of 
higher thermodynamic derivatives for ANFO will be given as well as some typical high 
 Reduced  chemistry  implicit  equations  of 
state  EoS  that  describe  the  thermodynamics  of 
detonation and explosion products are in common 
use  in  finite  element  and  compressible  fluid 
dynamic  computer  codes  these  have  been  the 
subject  of  excellent  reviews1.  These  EoS  are 
primarily used to describe the equilibrium products 
of  explosions  and  detonations  where  a  full 
computationally  expensive  and  where  there  is  a 
preference for differentiable equations rather than 
explicit  EoS  would  prove 
The  JWL  EoS  is  in  frequent  use  for  the 
products of high explosives in hydrocodes and in 
procedures to map cylinder test results or by fitting 
isentropes  determined  by 
heterogeneous  bulk  explosives  invariably  have 
large detonation failure diameters and also require 
thermodynamic  data  over  an  extended  density 
range  when  simulating  blasting  in  rock.  In  these 
applications the JWL EoS is not well suited due to 
its  anomalous  derivatives  and  assumptions 
regarding  constant  heat  capacity  and  Gruneisen 
Gamma2. Alternatives based on pseudo-polytropic 
forms  or  other  simplified  forms  have  also  some 
The Williamsburg EoS was developed to meet 
the  requirements  of  representing  the  detonation 
product  thermodynamics  of  non-ideal  explosives3 
and  in  addition  to  provide  correct  asymptotic 
low  density  smooth 
Gammas  and  avoid  singularities.  In  addition  the 
EoS  was  engineered  without  the  constraint  of  a 
constant Gruneisen Gamma with the flexibility to 
allow a temperature or entropy calculation for offisentrope data and avoidance of anomalous turning 
adiabatic  gamma  density 
In  its  original  form  and  applied  to  a  single 
isentrope4  the  Williamsburg  EoS  was  defined  in 
terms of two vectors f and  g  determined from a 
set  of  isentropic  Pressure   P     Volume  V  
Energy U   molar density  n  and Temperature 
The forms for fitting a function to the vectors 
f and g that  were  originally  proposed  comprise 
of  rational  polynomials 
internal  energy  U   can  be 
determined in terms of the total energy available to 
0U  using the following relation 
The  Williamsburg  EoS  affords  an  advantage 
over  tabular  EoS  in  that  it  provides  a  continuous 
function without the need for interpolation. It has 
been  favourable  compared  with  the  JWL  EoS5. 
Occasionally  it  has  been  found  that  this  original 
form can give rise to singularities when this EoS is 
used over an extended domain. 
Alternative  basis  functions  to  the  rational 
polynomials  originally  published  have  now  been 
developed  which  circumvent  this  problem.  The 
products EoS has been used for the basis of a full 
EoS treatment for ANFO and emulsion explosives.  
Ideal detonation codes  
 In  the  last  thirty  years  a  number  of  ideal 
computer  programs  have  been  developed  using 
fluid  equations  of  state6.  These 
overcome  the  shortcomings  of  earlier  procedures 
based on empirical EoS with the inherent need for 
different parameter sets. The data for a three term 
exponential alpha 6 potential used for each specie 
are  based  variously  on  fits  to  shock  Hugoniot 
Diamond anvil data ab-initio quantum mechanical 
calculation or estimates using corresponding states 
the  well-defined  constraints  of 
thermochemical  codes  and  Chapman  Jouguet 
detonation  theory  notably  mechanical  thermal 
and chemical equilibria there remain uncertainties 
in these analyses due to 
intermolecular potential data 
  Clusters  and  dissociated  molecules  may  be 
  Possible departures from ideal mixture rules  
  Approximations in a single fluid model 
Invariance  of  intramolecular  properties  to 
pressure and density 
  Validity of hard sphere perturbation theory or 
variational equivalent 
  Reliable  and  accurate  additional  term  for 
attractive polar terms e.g. H2O NH3 HF 
  Many body effects e.g. H2 
regarding  attainment  of 
chemical  equilibrium  is  not  realistic  in  non-ideal 
explosives  in  detonations  involving  clustering  to 
form  solids  e.g.  graphite  and  diamond  or  phase 
transitions solid to fluid. 
Despite  these  shortcomings  ideal  detonation 
codes  provide  a  useful  estimate  of  maximum 
circumstances as well a data to calibrate chemistry 
implicit EoS for use in reactive flow computations. 
Non Ideal Detonations 
Commercial  explosives  and  more  generally 
heterogeneous explosives with oxidizer and fuel in 
separate phases exhibit non-ideality in explosion 
detonation scenarios e.g. 
  Finite  several  mm  detonation  reaction  zone 
  Detonation  velocities  dependent  on  charge 
diameter and confinement 
  Detonation  failure  diameters  confinement 
  Curved shock front 
  Partial reaction in the detonation zone 
  Non-linear detonation velocity dependence on 
knowledge  of  the  detonation  product  density 
history in the post-detonation expansion as well as 
the  detonation  velocity  itself.  In  contrast  to  high 
explosives  there  is  interest  not  only  in  the 
detonation  product-confiner 
detonation  reaction  zone  but  for  much  of  the 
isentropic  expansion.  The  aim  of  these  models  is 
to assist in the optimization of blasting by limiting 
fines  causing  maximum  rock  breakage  and 
avoiding any damaging environmental effects  all 
at  minimum  cost.  Use  of  less  sensitive  energetic 
media is preferred on safety grounds and for many 
bulk  explosive  applications 
velocities are desirable. 
Reduced Chemistry Implicit EoS 
These  have  been  extensively 
elsewhere168.  Properties  of  these  EoS  should 
  Accuracy    thermodynamic  parameters  and 
P V T U S  regime of 
their derivatives in the 
  Correct Asymptotic behavior 
  No singularities or anomalous turning points 
  Ease  of  fitting  computation  and  analytic 
  Ability to fix on a reference state exactly e.g. 
  Flexibility  to  cover  a  sufficient 
domain where S  denotes entropy. 
 The  well-known  JWL  EoS  form  has  been 
used with much success. For an extended range of 
density  predicted  sound  speeds  can  be  negative 
giving  rise  to  computational  problems.  It  is  not 
ideally  suited  in  its  current  form  to  account  for 
the  turning  point  in  adiabatic  Gammas  of  high 
explosives where products are at densities greater 
than or in the vicinity of CJ values. 
 For  the  case  of  polytropic  and  pseudopolytropic  EoS  it  is  not  sufficient  to  realistically 
describe  condensed  phase  detonation  products  as 
polytropic  except  over  a  very  narrow  range  of 
density.  The  range  can  be  extended  by  allowing 
the  polytropic  index  to  be  density  dependent  and 
suing  a  polynomial  form  though  this  is  still 
limited in terms of reliable density range. 
We have chosen alternative basis functions for 
fitting  f  and  g  as defined in 1 and 2. These 
parameters  could  have  been  selected.  The 
defined in terms of  f  and  g  - 
Analyses  have  been  undertaken  for  three 
explosives  PETN  1730  kgm3  Nitromethane 
1125  kgm3  and  a  standard  oxygen  balanced 
ANFO  800  kgm3.  Five  isentropes  for  each 
explosive were generated with an ideal detonation 
code9 i.e. CJ isentropes and isentropes - 2.5 and 
-5 . Fits for f and g  as defined in 3 and 4 
were  obtained  using  a  standard 
package10.    The  resulting  expressions  were  then 
S and G . The specific heats at 
Ideal  detonation  calculations  have  been 
carried  out  for  three  typical  explosives  at  their 
maximum  or  normally  used  initial  densities  with 
an  ideal  detonation  code9  and  a  summary  of  the 
ideal detonation results are presented in Table 1. 
These  calculations  were  undertaken  with  a 
potential  based  fluid  equations  of  state11.  No 
allowance  for  any  departure  from  chemical 
equilibrium  was  included.  Some  differences  in 
predictions with similar codes can be expected due 
to  different  mixture 
intermolecular  potential  parameters  and  different 
incorporating  attractive  polar 
contributions.  In  all  this  study  ANFO  has  been 
taken as an oxygen balanced 946 ww ammonium 
nitrate  diesel  oil  mixture  with  the  quoted  initial 
For  the  three  explosives  the  variation  of  the 
Adiabatic and Gruneisen Gammas are examined as 
a function of entropy varying this by - 2.5 and 
-5    from  the  principal  CJ  isentrope.  The 
primary aims here were to check of the validity of 
the  Gruneisen  Gamma  invariance  at  constant 
density and its variation with product density over 
an extended range. A secondary check was to look 
at  the  form  of  the  Adiabatic  Gammas  over  a 
similar range to ensure correct behaviour over an 
extended  density  range  i.e.  to  include  states  at 
densities in excess of CJ state values. 
G   for  NitroFig  2  a  and  3b 
methane  as  a  function  of  volume  and  on 
different isentropes 
function of volume and on different isentropes 
With  reference  to  Figures  1  2  and  3  all 
parameters  have  been  determined  with 
Williamsburg  EoS  form  3  and  4.  A  modest 
G dependence on entropy is observed supporting 
use  of  Mie-Gruneisen  form  for  off-reference 
G show  a  substantial 
isentrope  quantities.  All 
variation with product density. 
The  characteristic  turning  point  in 
denser explosives PETN and NM in the vicinity 
of  their  CJ  detonation  state  is  clearly  evident. 
These  parameters  for  the  less  dense  ANFO 
explosive can be seen to be more monotonic 
S and  G  for ANFO as a   
function of volume and on different isentropes 
Specific  heats  for  the  three  explosives  have 
been  obtained  in  similar  fashion  to  the  isentrope 
data  and  these  are  illustrated  in  Figure  4  as  a 
function of product density over a similar range of 
entropy and concentration fluctuations caused as a 
result.    The  two  high  explosives  PETN  and 
Nitromethane  are  both  oxygen  negative  and  in  a 
chemical  equilibrium  analysis  both  graphitic  and 
diamond  phases  of  carbon  are  predicted.  In 
addition  at  high  density  turning  points  in 
observed  in  these  explosives.  The  conversion  of 
graphitic  carbon  to  CH4  and  CO  causes  the 
anomalous  behaviour  observed  in  Figure  4b.  
Nitromethane and c ANFO as a function of 
volume and on different isentropes 
It  is  difficult  to  both  perform  and  interpret 
heterogeneous  very  non-ideal  explosives.  Large 
critical  detonation  failure  diameters  even  in  a 
metal confiner can preclude the use of a 25.4 mm 
ID  charge.  Reaction  zone  lengths  are  inevitably 
longer in these media and the probability of nearly 
complete chemical reaction in the detonation zone 
is  small.  Detonation  reaction  zone  lengths  can 
exceed several mm. Obtaining a steady detonation 
in these systems can require pipes lengths 10 x or 
more tube diameter. 
A  seminal  study  of  ANFO  cylinder  test 
measurements  was  carried  out  some  years  ago12 
and  a  JWL  EoS  fit  to  the  average  of  two  sets  of 
data published. There have been suggestions that 
the  ANFO  may  not  have  been  oxygen  balanced 
due to earlier fire damage. 
The  raw  results  from  IPX  calculations  and 
ANFO  experimental  cylinder  test  studies  are 
shown  in  Table  2.  It  is  apparent  and  not 
surprising  that  there  is  a  disparity  between  ideal 
prediction  and  measurements  of  detonation 
Table 2 ANFO studies 
A  better  discriminator  is  to  compare  plots  of 
S for  the  ideal  system  based  on  the  JWL  and 
Williamsburg  EoS  forms  and  the  JWL  form 
determined in the actual tests as given in Figure 5. 
Williamsburg  EoS  fits  to  the  isentropes  obtained 
computationally  can  be  seen  to  be  good  over  the 
range  of  densities  illustrated.  There  is  a  clear 
determined from the expansion tests. Much of the 
difference can be explained in terms of the partial 
reaction  in  the  latter  i.e.  chemical  equilibrium 
condition  not  satisfied  this  is  as  more  or  less 
expected from the data of Table 2. The secondary 
maxima  in  the  experimental  plot  is  indicative  of 
S as function of volume for ANFO  IPX 
JWL  Williamsburg EoS cf experimental data 
The  Williamsburg  equation  of  state  has been 
implemented  to  describe  the  detonation  product 
in  a complete  non-ideal  detonation 
model13. Figure 6 shows a comparison between the 
ideal  detonation  pressure  profile  and  the  more 
realistic non-ideal detonation of ANFO confined in 
rock  as  predicted  by  this  model.  Clearly  the 
departure  from  the  ideal  CJ  pressure  in  this 
application is very significant and a fit to a single 
isentrope through the CJ state as in the JWL case 
would not be self-consistent. 
Figure 6 A comparison of pressure profiles in ideal 
More recently the EoS has been implemented 
into  a  fully  time-dependent  Lagrangian  scheme 
the  computational  environment  mgg 
provided  by  Mantis  Numerics  Ltd.  Figure  7 
demonstrates the evolution of the rarefaction wave 
in  a  one  dimensional  problem.  The  EoS  is 
numerically  well  behaved  in  all  the  preliminary 
test problems conducted so far. 
Figure  7  Evolution  of  a  1-D  rarefaction  wave  as 
function of time ms 
The  fitting  functions  45  makes   them  
which  currently  employ  JWL  due 
similarities  in  form.  Nevertheless  we  re-iterate 
that  while  the  form  is  akin  to  JWL  the  fit  itself 
larger  domain.  The 
thus  provides  a  better 
description  of  states  which  depart  significantly 
from the CJ conditions. These large departures are 
encountered in non-ideal explosive applications. 
optimization of blasting operations require models 
to  simulate  the  condensed  phase  detonation  and 
expansion  of  highly  non-ideal 
heterogeneous  explosives.  This  is  required  to  be 
i.e.  with  modest  computing 
resource  in  a  short  time  when  coupled  to  a  rock 
fragmentation  model.  A  simplified  chemistry 
implicit  fluid  EoS  is  required  that  describes  the 
behaviour of detonation products from shock front 
to end adiabat conditions. Simulations will include 
the  detonation  reaction  zone  where  this  EoS  is 
combined  via  mixture  rule  with  an  unreacted 
An  occasional  problem  with  the  previously 
proposed  Williamsburg  EoS  has  been  resolved 
eliminating  the  possibility  of  singularities  during 
the  calculation  of  an  adiabat  over  a  wide  density 
range. It has been shown that at any given density 
a  Mie-Gruneisen  term  is  sufficient  to  describe 
accessible  off-isentrope  data 
Gamma has a clear density dependence. 
phase  and  concentration  changes  particularly 
solid to fluid can have a dramatic effect on heat 
capacities.  Incorporation  of  high  density  turning 
points in the adiabatic gamma pose a challenge for 
simple  reduced  EoS  though  these  are  far  more 
relevant to dense high explosives. 
Incomplete  reaction  in  typical  commercial 
explosives  poses  a  challenge  both  to  experiment 
and  modelling.  As  regards  the  former  large 
comparatively long reaction zones make laboratory 
scale  investigations  intractable.  Unknown  rate 
descriptions for late reaction in rarefaction waves 
limit the ability to simulate any experimental data. 
test  data  do  exist  more 
sophisticated analyses than those attempted to date 
Orthogonal  Distance  Regression  NISTIR  4834 
11. Kang H.S. Lee C.S. Ree T.  Ree F.H. A 
Perturbation  Theory  of  Classical  Equilibrium 
Fluids J Chem Phys 821414 1985 
12.  Davis  L.L.    Hill  L.G.  ANFO  Cylinder 
Tests  CP620  Shock  Compression  of  Condensed 
Matter edited by M. D. Furnish N. N. Thadhani 
and Y. Horie American Institute of Physics 2002 
13.  Watt  S  D  Sharpe  G  J  Falle  S  A  E  G   
Braithwaite  M  A  streamline  approach  to  two 
dimensional  steady  non-ideal  detonation 
straight streamline approximation J Eng Math 75 
The  authors  thank  Prof  Sam  Falle  of  Mantis 
environment  and for  many  useful discussions  Dr 
Mark  Short  of  LANL  for  useful  discussions  and 
BME  Omnia  for  the  use  of  their  IPX  computer Nanoscale Void-Enhanced Initiation in Hexanitrostilbene 
Tzu-Ray Shana Ryan R. Wixom Aidan P. Thompson 
Sandia National Laboratories Albuquerque New Mexico 87185 USA 
Abstract. We report on the effect of nanoscale spherical and cylindrical voids on hot spot 
formation  and  initiation  in  hexanitrostilbene  HNS  crystals  under  shock  conditions.  
Reactive molecular dynamics simulations are performed using the ReaxFF force field as 
implemented  in  the  LAMMPS  software.    Isothermal  equation  of  state  and  the  primary 
dissociation pathway from ReaxFF agree well with diamond anvil cell measurements and 
density functional theory calculations.  Hot spot formation due to void collapse in HNS is 
studied  using  explicit  large-scale  molecular  dynamics  simulation  of  a  supported 
shockwave  propagating  along  the  010  direction  in  the  HNS  crystal.      The  effect  of 
spherical  and  cylindrical  voids  is  similar  although  hot  spot  temperature  is  somewhat 
lower for cylindrical voids.  Entrained solvent such as dimethylformamide in the void 
strongly reduces hot spot temperature and chemical reactivity. 
that  heterogeneities  concentrate 
Material  defects  and  other  heterogeneities 
such  as  dislocations  micro-porosity  and  grain 
boundaries  play  key  roles  in  the  shock-induced 
initiation  of  detonation  in  energetic  materials.  
Continuum hydrodynamics shock simulations have 
shockwave  energy  in  small  regions2  .  This  local 
excitation  of  the  molecules  allows  exothermic 
chemical  reactions  to  occur  leading  to  further 
energy  release  and  initiation.    Beyond  this  basic 
understanding  many  of  the  details  are  poorly 
resolve  the  interior  of  shocked  samples  on  the 
relevant  time  scale  and  length  scale.    The  results 
from hydrodynamic shock simulations are strongly 
dependent  on  the  materials  models  chosen  for 
properties such as strength viscosity and reaction 
kinetics  none  of  which  are  calibrated  on  these 
time scales and length scales.   
NEMD  simulation  provides  a  way  to  examine 
the  material  behavior 
the role of heterogeneities from a different point of 
view.  This approach puts strong limitations on the 
accessible length scales and time scales but makes 
no  assumptions  about  the  material  properties.  
entirely  by  the  interatomic  potential  used  which 
can  be  constructed  to  reproduce  high  fidelity 
quantum  mechanical  calculations  for  many  small 
configurations  of  atoms.    By  using  a  reactive 
interatomic  potential  the  mutual  coupling  of 
deformation  can  be  explored  in  a  consistent 
In this manuscript we are using reactive MD 
to explore the effect of nanoscale voids on hot spot 
growth  and  initiation  in  hexanitrostilbene  HNS 
conditions.    We  use  the  reactive  force  field 
ReaxFF3  4  as  implemented  in  the  LAMMPS5 
molecular  dynamics  simulation  package.    We 
validate  the  quality  of  the  ReaxFF  force field  for 
HNS  by  characterizing  the  structural  properties 
and  isothermal  equation  of  state  of  pure  HNS 
Results and Discussions 
crystal.    The  initial  decomposition  pathway  for  a 
gas  phase  HNS  molecule  from  ReaxFF 
compared  to  ab  initio  quantum  mechanical  and 
first  principles  density  functional  theory  DFT 
then  create  spherical  and 
cylindrical  voids  in  the HNS  crystals  and drive  a 
supported shockwave through the crystals.  Shockinduced void collapse and hot spot formation with 
spherical  and  cylindrical  voids  are  discussed.  
Finally  we  discuss 
the  effect  of  entrained 
dimethylformamide DMF solvent in the void on 
hot spot formation. 
The ReaxFF description for HNS is created by 
merging6 the ReaxFF combustion force field7 with 
the nitramine force field8-10.  The DFT simulations 
are performed using the Vienna ab initio package 
VASP11  12  using  strictly  converged  settings.  
pseudopotentials  provided  in  the  VASP  database 
were used and calculations have been done using 
AM0515  exchangethe  Armiento  Mattsson 
correlation  functional.    A  plane-wave  expansion 
with an 800 eV cutoff was used and the Brillouin 
zone was sampled with a Baldereschi Mean Value 
Point  with  one  k-point  at  14  14  14.    We  have 
verified that a sampling with a 444 MonkhorstPack k-point mesh yielded similar results.   
We  first  validate  the  quality  of  the  ReaxFF 
force  field for  describing the  structural  properties 
of  crystalline  HNS.    Lattice  constants  for  HNS 
from  experiments16  are  a0    22.33  b0    5.57  
c0    13.78  and      110  while  those  from 
ReaxFF at 0K are a0  24.75 b0  5.07 c0  
14.18 and   111.  Densities from experiments 
and  ReaxFF  are  1.744  and  1.678  gcm3 
Isothermal  equation  of  state  EOS  from 
diamond anvil cell DAC measurements17 18 DFT 
MD simulations and ReaxFF MD simulations are 
illustrated  in  Figure  1.    DFT  and  ReaxFF  MD 
simulations  are  performed  at  300K  with  0.4  ps 
timesteps  using  experimental  lattice  constants.  
For pure HNS ReaxFF MD simulations predict an 
EOS  that  closely  matches  that  from  DFT  MD 
simulations  and  they  both  fall  slightly  above  the 
indicating  a  stiffer  EOS.  
However HNS powder is commonly recrystallized 
from  a  solution  of  DMF  and  some  amount  of 
solvent  is  entrained  within  the  solid.  The  amount 
of  solvent  entrained  can  be  several  wt.  In 
addition  to  solvent  HNS  may  contain  other 
impurities  remaining  from  synthesis. 
reported  his  samples  to  be  99.6  HNS18.    We 
therefore  used  the  ReaxFF  model  to  study  the 
effect  of  introducing small  amounts  of DMF  into 
the crystal.  First we substituted 1 HNS molecule 
with 1 DMF molecule in a 142 HNS supercell  
meaning the simulation box contained 1 DMF and 
31 HNS molecules or 0.52 wt DMF.  To achieve 
a higher DMF concentration we again substituted 
1  HNS  with  1  DMF  molecule  but  in  a  smaller 
121 supercell giving 2.32 wt DMF.  For HNS 
with 0.52 wt DMF ReaxFF simulations predict 
an  EOS  that  closely  matches  the  DAC  values 
while  with  2.32  wt  DMF 
significantly softer.  This indicates that  entrained 
DMF tends to soften the EOS and this is consistent 
with the experimental EOS being somewhat softer 
than DFT and ReaxFF predictions for pure HNS.   
Fig. 1. Color online Isothermal equation of state 
of HNS from experiment17  18 black squares and 
our  DFT  MD  magenta  circles  and  ReaxFF  MD 
simulations green blue and red cross symbols. 
We then perform a cook-off simulation of a 
gas  phase  HNS  molecule  using  ReaxFF.    One 
single HNS molecule is placed in a simulation box 
without periodic boundary conditions and a NoseHoover thermostat is used in an NVT ensemble.  A 
series  of  simulations  with  temperatures  starting 
from 500K are performed.  No reactions occur for 
the  entire  10  ps  with  temperatures  lower  than 
1400K.  At 1400K we observe the breaking of the 
decomposition  pathway  from  ReaxFF  is  in  good 
agreement  with  higher  levels  of  theory.    We 
therefore suggest that breaking of the central C-C 
decomposition  pathway  for  a  gas  phase  HNS 
Next  we  create  spherical  and  cylindrical 
voids  in  the  HNS  crystals  and  drive  a  supported 
shockwave through the crystals.  Snapshots of the 
HNS  crystals  containing  a  spherical  or  a 
cylindrical void are shown in Figure 3.  The HNS 
crystal with a 22 nm spherical void has dimensions 
of  55.8    80.1    45.4  nm3  and  contains  17.9 
million  atoms  while  the  one  with  a  22  nm 
cylindrical  void  has  dimensions  of  2.2    80.1   
45.4 nm3 and contains 610000 atoms.  The shock 
the  010  crystallographic 
orientation of HNS and this is aligned with the y 
direction  of  the  simulation  box.  The  100  and 
001  orientations  are  aligned  with  the  x  and  z 
directions  respectively. 
  These  crystals  are 
periodic in the x and z directions and non-periodic 
with free surfaces in the y direction.  
center C-C double bond after approximately 2 ps. 
The  potential  energy  surface  for  this  initial  bond 
breaking process is illustrated in Figure 2.  At 1.6 
ps  one  of  the  two  center  C  atoms  bond  to  an  O 
atom on a nearby NO2 group thus breaking the NO bond then at 2.2 ps the other C atom of the two 
center  C  atoms  bonds  to  another  O  atom  from  a 
nearby  NO2  group.    Immediately  after  these  two 
central C atoms bond with O atoms the initial C-C 
bond is broken.  The breaking of this central C-C 
double bond results in the decomposition of HNS 
into  two  C7H3O6N3  fragments    as  shown  in  the 
inset snapshot at 2.4 ps. 
Fig. 2. Color online Potential energy surfaces of 
gas  phase  HNS  molecule  decomposition  from 
ReaxFF  red    symbols  ab  initio  green   
symbols and DFT blue  symbols calculations. 
To validate this decomposition pathway found 
using  the  ReaxFF  force  field  we  convert  10 
snapshots along this pathway into input geometries 
initio  quantum  mechanical  and  DFT 
calculations  -  each  data  point 
represents  a  snapshot.    DFT  calculations  are 
performed  using  the  same  setup  as  described 
the  optB88  van  der  Waals 
initio  calculations  are 
performed  using  the  NWChem  software21  with 
correlation-consistent 
double-zeta  cc-pVDZ  basis  set  and  the  B3LYP 
functional  for  exchange-correlation  interactions.  
In these quantum mechanical calculations only the 
electrons  are  relaxed  while  the  ions  are  fixed.  
Results  indicate  that  the  energy  barrier  for  this 
the  AM05  functional 
Fig.  3.  Oblique  views  of  the  HNS  crystals 
containing a 22 nm spherical void left and a 22 
nm cylindrical void right. For the spherical void 
left snapshot only a thin slice of the system was 
made visible to show the void.  
Figure  4  illustrates  our  NEMD  simulation  of 
shockwave propagation in the HNS crystal with a 
22 nm spherical void.  A supported shockwave is 
initiated  at  the  left  010  surface  by  driving  it  at 
2.25 kms against a rigid layer of atoms imitating 
collision with an infinite impedance impactor.  The 
shockwave  propagates  through  the  crystal  and 
reaches the upstream void surface at 3.6 ps Figure 
4a.  HNS molecules along with fragments from the 
surface  which  are  mostly 
C7H3O6N3  and  NO2  continue  to  travel  across  the 
void Figures 4b and collide with the down stream 
void  surface  at  7.0  ps  Figure  4c.    This  jet  of 
fragments travels through the void with an average 
time-of-flight velocity of approximately 6.5 kms.  
This is substantially higher than the expected 2up 
velocity  of  5.5  kms  expected  to  occur  behind  a 
planar  release  wave.    This  increase  in  time-offlight velocity is due to the lensing effect22 of the 
concave void surface.  After the collision between 
the jet of upstream fragments and the down stream 
void  surface  a  hot  spot  forms.  The  shockwave 
continue  on  to  reach  the  opposite  end  of  the 
simulation cell which is treated as a free surface 
at  13.0  ps  Figure  4e.    Shockwave  velocity  is 
estimated to be 6.15 kms. 
Fig. 4. Sequence of snapshots illustrating the propagation of the shockwave through the HNS crystal and 
void collapse of the 22 nm spherical void. a 3.6 ps b 5.3 ps c 7.0 ps d 8.7 ps and e13.0 ps.  
Atoms color coded by 010 axial velocity dark blue is -2 kms green is 0 kms red is 5 kms. 
For shockwave propagating through the HNS 
crystal  containing  a  22  nm  cylindrical  void  the 
snapshots  are  shown  in  Figure  5.    The  impact 
velocity  is  again  2.25  kms  and  the  shockwave 
reaches the upstream void surface at 3.6 ps Figure 
5a but the HNS molecules and fragments ejected 
from the upstream void surface do not collide with 
the down stream void surface until 7.2 ps Figure 
5c.  The average time-of-flight velocity of this jet 
of fragments is approximately 6.1 kms about 6 
slower  than  that  of  the  jet  in  the  spherical  void 
which  indicates  a  weaker  lensing  effect  of  the 
cylindrical void surface.  Nevertheless a hot spot 
still  forms  after  the  collision  between  the  jet  of 
upstream  fragments  and  the  down  stream  void 
surface.    The  shockwave  reaches  the  free  surface 
of  the  crystal  at  13.8  ps  Figure  5e.    The 
shockwave has an estimated velocity of 5.80 kms. 
Shown  in  Figure  6  are  the  corresponding 
temperature maps in the shocked HNS crystal as a 
function of time.  The temperature is calculated by 
grouping atoms into small cubic regions based on 
their positions and the temperature of each region 
is calculated as the average kinetic energy of each 
atomic  degree  of  freedom  after  subtracting  the 
mass-weighted streaming velocity of all the atoms 
in  the  region.    To  compare  with  the  HNS  crystal 
containing  the  cylindrical  void  only  a  thin  slice 
that is 2.2 nm thick and cuts through the center of 
the  spherical  void  is  used  in  calculating  the 
thin  slice  contains 
610000  atoms.    Although  the  jet  of  upstream 
fragments already formed at 5.3 ps Figure 6a the 
temperature  of  the  jet  is  low  since  most  of  the 
kinetic energy is due to the streaming velocity.  7.2 
ps  after  initial  impact  the  hot  spot  is  starting  to 
develop and is distinct from the heating occurring 
directly adjacent to the reflective wall Figure 6b.  
At  13.0  ps  when  the  shockwave  reaches  the  free 
surface  Figure  6f  the  hot  spot  has  noticeably 
spread  transversely  and  axially.    Note  the  0K 
regions  at  the  left  end  of  the  temperature  maps 
correspond  to  the  piston  made  of  a  rigid  layer  of 
Fig. 5. Sequence of snapshots illustrating the propagation of the shockwave through the HNS crystal and 
void collapse of the 22 nm cylindrical void. a 3.6 ps b 5.3 ps c 7.2 ps d 8.7 ps and e13.8 ps  
Atoms color coded by 010 axial velocity dark blue is -2 kms green is 0 kms red is 5 kms.
Fig. 6. Color online Temperature maps of the HNS crystal containing the 22 nm spherical void at a 5.3 
ps b 7.2 ps c 7.7 ps d 8.7 ps e 10.4 and f 13.0 ps.  White region corresponds to the void dark 
blue blue is 300K green is 1000K yellow is 2000K red is 3000K. 
the  HNS  crystal  containing 
Figure 7 shows the corresponding temperature 
cylindrical void.  We find that the cylindrical void 
of  the  same  size  produces  a  hot  spot  that  is  less 
intense than the spherical void.  7.7 ps after initial 
impact Figure 7c the hot spot is just starting to 
develop.  At 13.0 ps Figure 7f the hot spot has 
transversely  and  axially 
although  the  temperature  is  somewhat  lower 
compared  to  the  crystal  with  the  spherical  void.  
Note  that  the  developed  hot  spot  is  noticeably 
smaller  than  the  developed  hot  spot  from  the 
temperatures of the developed hot spots.  For the 
crystal  with  the  spherical  void  only  a  thin  slice 
that is 2.2 nm thick containing the same number of 
atoms  as  the  crystal  with  the  cylindrical  void  is 
used  in  calculating  the  temperatures.  In  both 
simulations  only  the  region  with  temperature 
greater  than  1500K  is  included  in  the  calculation 
of  average  hot  spot  temperature.    As  shown  in 
Figure  8  evolutions  of  the  temperature  curves 
correspond  well  to  the  hot  spot  formation.    HNS 
crystal  with  the  spherical  void  has  a  somewhat 
higher  hot  spot  temperature  than  that  with  the 
cylindrical  void.    This  is  due  to  the  stronger 
lensing  effect  resulting  in  the  more  intense  void 
In  terms  of  computational  cost  it  took  25 
million  core  hours  on  the  Intel  Sandy  Bridge 
Chama machine at Sandia National Laboratories to 
finish the shock simulation with the spherical void 
while  only  35000  core  hours  were  required  to 
finish  the  shock  simulation  with  the  cylindrical 
Because  of  the  reduced  computational  cost 
and similar behavior we used the cylindrical void 
configuration  exclusively  to  study  the  effect  of 
entrained  dimethylformamide  DMF  solvent  in 
the void on hot spot formation.  Shown in Figure 9 
are  snapshots  of  the  equilibrated  HNS  crystals 
containing  a  22  nm  cylindrical  void  filled  with 
DMF  at  densities  of  0.50  gcc  and  0.95  gcc.  
These  structures  are  created  by  first  carving  a 
cylindrical void out of the HNS crystals followed 
by equilibration at 300K using an NVT ensemble 
with  the  ReaxFF  force  field.    DMF  molecules  at 
the  two  different  densities  are  then  inserted  into 
the  voids  and  another  equilibration  at  300K  is 
performed.  0.50 gcc of DMF filled in the 22 nm 
cylindrical is equivalent to 3.4 wt of DMF while 
0.95 gcc of DMF equals to 6.3 wt DMF. 
Shockwaves  are  then  generated  in  the  same 
manner as described above with impact velocities 
shockwaves reach the upstream void surface at 3.6 
ps but they reach the right end free surface at 13.4 
ps  and  13.1  ps  for  the  void  filled  with  0.50  gcc 
and 0.95 gcc DMF respectively.  In other words 
  In  both  configurations 
Fig. 7. Color online Temperature maps of the HNS crystal containing the 22 nm cylindrical void at a 5.3 
ps b 7.4 ps c 7.7 ps d 8.7 ps e 10.4 and f 13.8 ps.  White region corresponds to the void dark 
blue blue is 300K green is 1000K yellow is 2000K red is 3000K. 
Although  the  temperatures  are  lower  in  the 
cylindrical void configuration phenomena leading 
to  hot  spot  formation  including  jetting  of  the 
upstream  void  fragments  void  collapse  and 
collision  between  upstream  void  fragments  and 
down stream void surface are qualitatively similar 
to the spherical void configuration.  It is therefore 
reasonable to investigate hot spot formation due to 
void  collapse  and  subsequent  growth  of  hot  spot 
on  the  micron-scale  using  the  cylindrical  void 
Fig.  8.  Hot  spot  temperatures  from  HNS  crystals 
containing  the  spherical  void  blue  curve  or  the 
cylindrical void red curve.  Hot spot temperature 
is defined by regions with temperature higher than 
the shockwave travels with an averaged velocity of 
5.97 kms with the void filled with 0.50 gcc DMF 
while  the  averaged  shockwave  velocity  is  6.11 
kms with the void filled with 0.95 gcc DMF.   
Nomura  et  al.22  have  pointed  out  that  the 
existence of a void reduces the shockwave velocity 
due  to  the  pinning  effect.    Compared  to  the 
averaged  shockwave  velocity  with  the  void  filled 
with  vacuum  which  is  5.80  kms  this  indicates 
that  the  pinning  effect  of  the  void  is  weakened 
when  the  void  is  partially  or  fully  filled  with 
Fig. 9. Snapshots of the equilibrated HNS crystals 
containing a 22 nm cylindrical void filled with 
dimethylformamide DMF at densities of a 0.50 
gcc and b 0.95 gcc. 
Illustrated  in  Figure  10  are  the  temperature 
maps  of  the  HNS  crystals  with  the  22  nm 
cylindrical  void  filled  with  DMF  at  two  different 
densities  when  shockwaves  reach  the  right  end 
free surface.  Compared to the void with vacuum 
at the end of the shock simulation Figure 7f the 
hot spots are much smaller and their temperatures 
are much lower.  This is because when the void is 
filled  with  DMF  molecules 
upstream void fragments as well as the streaming 
reduced.    This  reduction  is  enhanced  with  more 
DMF molecules in the void - with the higher DMF 
density  of  0.95  gcc  the  hot  spot  temperature  is 
much lower than that with the lower DMF density.  
It is interesting to note that for the void filled with 
0.95 gcc DMF Figure 10b the interface between 
HNS and DMF has a slightly higher temperature.  
This is a result of viscous heating due to interfacial 
Fig. 10. Temperature of the HNS crystals 
containing the 22 nm cylindrical void filled with 
DMF at densities of a 0.50 gcc and b 0.95 gcc 
when shockwaves reach the right end free surface 
at 13.4 ps and 13.1 ps respectively.  Dark blue is 
300K green is 1000K yellow is 2000K red is 
the  overall  system 
temperature  evolutions  of  HNS  crystals  with  the 
22  nm  cylindrical  void  with  vacuum  and  two 
different  densities  of  DMF  solvent.    Void  with 
vacuum has the highest system temperature while 
void with 0.95 gcc DMF has the lowest.  At the 
end of these shock simulations HNS crystal with 
the  void  with  vacuum  has  a  temperature  that  is 
22  and  32  higher  than  those  with  void  filled 
with 0.50 gcc and 0.95 gcc DMF respectively. 
Fig. 11.  Color online Overall system 
temperature evolutions of HNS crystals with the 
22 nm cylindrical void with vacuum red curve 
filled with 0.50 gcc DMF green curve and filled 
with 0.95 gcc DMF blue curve. 
Smaller  hot  spots  and 
temperatures  have  a  direct  impact  on  chemical 
in  Figure  12  are  HNS 
C7H3O6N3  NO2  and  H2O  species  found  in  the 
crystals  with  the  void  filled  with  vacuum  0.50 
gcc DMF and 0.95 gcc DMF.  The consumption 
of HNS  is  similar  in  all  three  cases but  the  void 
with  vacuum  has  a  slightly  higher  consumption 
rate.  The formation of C7H3O6N3 fragments for all 
three cases before 5.3 ps is similar however with 
0.95 gcc DMF this rate starts to fall behind after 
5.3 ps.  After 7.7 ps with vacuum the C7H3O6N3 
fragments are being consumed at a faster rate due 
to  a  higher  temperature  from  the  well-developed 
hot spot. Formation of NO2 starts to differ after the 
shockwave passes through the void and H2O starts 
to  form  also  after  the  shockwave  passes  through 
the void in both cases void with vacuum has the 
fastest rate while void with 0.95 gcc DMF has the 
Fig.  12.  Color  online  Reactant  HNS  major 
intermediate  C7H3O6N3  and  NO2  and  major 
product  H2O  species  found  in  shocked  HNS 
crystals with a 22 nm cylindrical void filled with 
vacuum  red  curves  0.95  gcc  DMF  green 
curves  and  0.50  gcc  DMF  blue  curves.  
Species  amounts  y-axes  are  relative  to  the 
original number of HNS molecules in the crystals 
reactive  molecular 
simulations  we  have  investigated  the  effect  of 
nanoscale sphericalcylindrical voids and entrained 
solvent  on  hot  spot  formation  and  initiation  in 
hexanitrostilbene  HNS  crystals  under  shock 
  With  our  DFT  and  ReaxFF 
simulations  we  have  found  that  the  isothermal 
equation of state is significantly softened with an 
addition  of  approximately  0.5  wt  DMF  in  the 
HNS crystal.  We have further found this softened 
EOS  is  in  good  agreement  with  previous  DAC 
measurements17  18.    Using  a  combination  of  ab 
initio first principles and ReaxFF techniques we 
propose  that  the  breaking  of  the  central  C-C 
decomposition  pathway  for  an  isolated  gas  phase 
Using  large-scale  reactive  MD  simulations 
we  have  confirmed  that  the  use  of  a  cylindrical 
void  gives  results  that  are  consistent  with  that 
obtained  with  a  spherical  void  but  with  greatly 
reduced computational cost.  With the cylindrical 
void filled with entrained DMF solvent we found 
that the hot spot is much smaller and the hot spot 
increasing DMF density. 
The  authors  thank  Prof.  Adri  van  Duin  for 
providing the HNS ReaxFF force field description.  
This  research  used  resources  of  the  National 
Energy  Research  Scientific  Computing  Center 
which is supported by the Office of Science of the 
U.S.  Department  of  Energy  under  Contract  No. 
Sandia  National  Laboratories  is  a  multiprogram  laboratory  managed  and  operated  by 
Sandia Corporation a wholly owned subsidiary of 
Lockheed  Martin  Corporation 
Department of Energys National Nuclear Security 
contract  DE-AC0494AL85000.  SAND2014-15518 J A Framework for Analyzing the Effect of Multiple Sources of Stochasticity on the 
Probabilistic Ignition of PBXs 
Seokpum Kim Yasuyuki Horie and Min Zhou 
George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering 
Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta Georgia 30332-0405 USA 
 ret. Air Force Research Lab Munitions Directorate  
2306 Perimeter Road Eglin AFB FL 32542 USA 
Abstract.  This  study  focuses  on  the  effects  of  two  sources  of  material  stochasticity
random  morphology  and  fluctuations  in  interfacial  strengthon  the  probability  of 
ignition of PBXs under impact loading. Each source of stochasticity gives rise to a degree 
of variation in the sizes locations and temperatures of hotspots which in turn results in a 
degree  of  randomness  in  the  ignition  behavior  of  the  materials.  The  probabilistic 
variations of the time to criticality due to each source are quantified. To understand how 
the  different  sources  combine  to  affect  the  overall  ignition  behavior  we  developed  a 
nested  superposition  model.  The  nested  probability  model  is  based  on  two  layers  of 
probability  with  parameters  from  one  layer  determined  by  those  from  the  other  layer. 
Results  show  that  the  model  captures  the  interactions  between  the  two  sources  of 
variations in material attributes. As an example of application of the nested probability 
model  data  obtained  from  crushing  experiment  of  catalyst  particles  reported  in  the 
literature are analyzed.  
In  polymer-bonded  composite  materials 
inherent  random  morphology  of  different  phases 
and  the  interfacial  strength  between  constituents 
are two distinct factors that dominate the behavior 
of  the  materials.  Statistical  approaches  have  been 
used  to  analyze  the  stochastic  material  behavior. 
Vel and Goupee 1 2 studied the effect of random 
morphology  of  2-phase  composites  on  material 
properties  and  failure  strength.  To  analyze  the 
effect  of  interfacial  bonding  Yanase  et  al.  3 
developed  analytical  constitutive  models 
imperfect  particle-binder 
interfaces  during  quasi-static  deformation.  The 
uncertainty in material behavior however is often 
not caused by individual sources of inhomogeneity 
alone  but  rather  by  the  combined  effect  of 
multiple  factors.  This  paper  extends  our  previous 
study 4 focusing on the effects of two sources of 
stochastic variations at the microstructural level on 
hotspot  development  in  a  PBX.  The  random 
variations  considered  are  associated  with  the 
morphologies  of  constituent  phases  and 
bonding  strength  of  the  grain-binder  interfaces. 
The  nested  model  developed  here  is  used  to 
analyze  experimental  data  reported  in  literature 
Stochastic Behavior Analyzed 
this  paper  utilizes  a 
Lagrangian  cohesive 
finite  element  method 
CFEM.  The  microstructures  analyzed  are  PBXs 
consisting  of  HMX  grains  and  an  Estane  binder. 
Multiple  microstructures  having 
similar  attributes  but  random  morphology  are 
generated using Voronoi tessellation. Quantitative 
details  of  the  microstructural  attributes  including 
the  specific  surface  area  and  the  grain  size 
distribution are described in Ref. 6. The size of 
the  microstructure  is  15  mm    3  mm  and  the 
configuration is shown in Fig. 1a In addition to 
the variations in constituent morphologies spatial 
fluctuations in the bonding between the binder and 
the  grains  are  also  considered.  These  fluctuations 
follow  the  Gaussian  distribution  with  an  average 
of  35  MPa  and  the  standard  deviation  of  7  MPa 
20  of  the  average  value  as  presented  in  Fig. 
1b. Figures 1c-d show close-up view of spatial 
distribution  of  random  variations  in  bonding 
strength  with  a  given  morphology.  The  boundary 
velocity  of  v    100  ms  is  imposed  on  the  top 
surface and other surfaces are fixed. 
reach  a  thermal  runaway.  Since  the  threshold  is 
calculation  of  HMX  it  depends  on  the  chemical 
kinetic model. The ignition criterion in this study 
is derived by Tarver et al. 7 and the details of its 
application are given in Barua et al. 8. 
Effects  of  Each  Source  of  Microstructural 
To provide a basis for systematic comparison 
ignition  times  from  microstructures  with  the  first 
type  of  stochasticity  random  morphology  are 
analyzed.  A  microstructure  group  used  in  this 
analysis  consists  of 
twenty  samples  having 
statistically  similar  attributes  such  as  HMX 
volume  fraction  and  specific  interfacial  area  with 
spatially  uniform  interfacial  bonding  strength  of 
  35  MPa.  The  probability  distribution  of 
ignition times obtained from this group is shown in 
Fig. 2a. This distribution results from variations 
in  morphology  of  constituents  which  will  be 
referred  to  as  Distribution-U  in  the  following 
Fig.  1  Microstructures  with  spatially  varying  bonding 
strength  a  configuration  of  microstructure  and  loading 
condition  b  Gaussian  distribution  of  the  interfacial 
strength c-d Spatially varying interfacial bonding 
The  ignition  criterion  is  based  on  a  sizetemperature threshold that represents the minimum 
diameter of a hotspot at temperature T. The sizetemperature of a hotspot above the threshold will 
Fig.  2  Relation  between  Distribution-V  and  the  ignition 
time of the corresponding microstructure a Distribution
 
U  b  Distribution-Vs  from  the  selected  microstructure 
morphologies A B and C.
Among these samples in Distribution-U three 
representative microstructures are chosen. The first 
microstructure chosen A has the earliest time to 
the  second  microstructure 
chosen  B  has  the  median  time  to  criticality 
tCUB and the last microstructure chosen C has 
the latest time to criticality tCUC. Three new sets 
of microstructures are generated one set based on 
each of these three microstructures. The samples in 
each of the new sets have the same microstructure 
geometric  morphology  corresponding  to  each  of 
the three representative microstructures chosen but 
binder-grain bonding strengths that vary randomly 
from  location  to  location.  The  three  probability 
distributions  obtained  from  these  three  sets  of 
microstructures  are  shown  in  Fig.  2b.  These 
distributions  result  from  variations  in  interfacial 
strength between HMX and binder which will be 
referred  to  as  Distribution-V  in  the  following 
interfacial  binding 
Two  interesting  features  can  be  seen  by 
comparing  the  Distribution-Vs  and  the  baseline 
ignition  times  tc  for  the  three  samples  in 
Distribution-U. The first feature is that the ignition 
time in Fig. 1a for each of the three samples with 
ignition time for the corresponding sample sets in 
Fig.  1b-d.  Distribution-V  from  microstructure 
morphology A lies on invariably later time than 
its baseline ignition time tCUA. note the dotted 
vertical  line  in  Fig.  1b.  On  the  other  hand  the 
opposite  is  observed  for  Distribution-V  from 
microstructure  morphology  C  their  ignition 
times  are  invariably  earlier  than  that  of  tCUC. 
Distribution-V  from  microstructure  B  straddles 
both sides of its baseline ignition time tCUB. The 
second feature is that the mean ignition times for 
the three Distribution-Vs follow the same order of 
their  baseline  ignition  times  of  corresponding 
microstructures  in  Distribution-U.  Although  only 
the  results  of  Distribution-V  for  three  samples 
A B and C out of the twenty samples in 
Distribution-U  are  shown  above 
Distribution-V  for  all  twenty  microstructures  in 
Distribution-U show similar features and trends. 
Combined  effects  of  variations  in  morphology 
and interface strength 
The  quantification  of  probability  distribution 
utilizes  three-parameter  Weibull  function  in  the 
where t is the time to criticality t0 is the minimum 
time  to  criticality  or  the  cutoff  time  to  criticality 
below which the probability of ignition is zero  is 
a  scaling  parameter  that  affects  the  slope  of  the 
distribution  curve  and  m  is  Weibull  modulus. 
Barua  et  al.  7  showed  that  m    2  for  the 
conditions used in this analysis. From the Weibull 
equation  the  median  time  to  criticality  can  be 
                  2 
The  relations  between  Distribution-U  and 
Distribution-V  are  analyzed  using  Weibull 
distribution.  The  relations  between  the  Weibull 
parameters  of  Distribution-V  and  the  ignition 
Distribution-U  are  obtained  and  fitted  to  linear 
equations in the form of 
for  corresponding  microstructures 
the  overall  shift  of 
    and              3-a 
                        3-b    
where  the  parameters        and    are  fitting 
constants. The values of those constants are listed 
Table 1. Parameters in Eqs. 3a-b. 
Parameter    represents  the  strength  of  the 
effect  of  morphology  variations  on  the  median 
time to criticality of Distribution-V. A value of   
1  would  indicate  a  simple  direct  superposition  of 
the  morphology  variation  effect  and  the  property 
fluctuation  effect  for  the  mean  ignition  time  for 
Distribution-V. A value of   0 would mean no 
morphology  variation  effect on  the  mean  ignition 
time  for  Distribution-V.  Values  of    that  are 
between  1  and  0  indicate  the  second  source  of 
stochasticity  diminishes  the  effect  of  the  first 
source of stochasticity. For the conditions studied 
the value of   0.51 suggests that the influence of 
the  first  source  is  similar  to  that  of  the  second 
source  on  the  median  time  to  criticality  of 
in  Distribution-V  due 
  Parameter    embodies 
Parameter  represents the potential scaling of 
the mean ignition time for Distribution-U that may 
be required in order to arrive at the ignition times 
introduction  of  the  second  source  of  stochasticity 
the random fluctuations in interfacial strength. A 
indicates  no  scaling  here. 
Parameters  and  quantify the ratio between the 
slope  of  Distribution-V  and 
dependency of the ignition probability distribution 
associated with  Distribution-V  on  the  first source 
of  stochasticity.  A  value  of      0  would  indicate 
that the slopes of all Distribution-V curves are the 
same.  Higher    values  would  suggest  stronger 
dependence  of  Distribution  V  probability  profiles 
on  Distribution-U.  Parameter    alone  determines 
the slope of the Distribution-V ignition probability 
curve  for  the  sample  with  the  microstructure 
morphology  that  generates  the  minimum  time  to 
microstructure morphology in Distribution-U as a 
probability profile associated with Distribution U. 
To combine the effects of the two sources of 
stochasticity on ignition probability we propose a 
nested  probability  superposition  model.  This 
nested  probability  model  recognizes  the  fact  that 
there are two layers of probability distributions. 
The  first  layer  is  due  to  the  random  variations  in 
microstructure  geometry.  The  second  layer  is 
associated  with  the  fluctuations  in  interfacial 
bonding  strength.  Note  that  random  variations  in 
bonding  strength  can  only  occur  along 
boundaries  between  the  binder  and  the  energetic 
granules  the  discussion  of  variations  in  bonding 
can  only  be  pursued  for  given  microstructures. 
Because of this the fluctuations in microstructure 
morphology  must  be  treated  as  the  first  layer  of 
variations which can be made regardless interfacial 
strength.  On  the  other  hand  the  variation  in 
bonding  is  a  second  level  variation  that  rides 
with the microstructure and therefore is treated as 
the  secondary  variation  here.  This  layering  of 
variations determines the order or manner in which 
the  superposition  of  the  two  levels  of  probability 
superposition  model  developed  here  reflects  this 
the  properly  superimposed 
combined ignition probability function must agree 
obtained  with  all  cases  taken  as  one  sample  set. 
Figure  2  compares  the  superimposed  distribution 
using  nested  probability  model  Green  dots  and 
the  total  probability  distribution  red  line.  The 
consistency between the two confirms the validity 
of the nested superposition model and the insights 
ignition  probability 
Fig.  3  Nested  Weibull  distribution 
probability from all data red and Distribution-U blue. 
the  nested  Weibull 
probability distribution is obtained based on Joint 
probability that is multiplication of a probability 
function  for  Distribution-U  and  a  conditional 
for  Distribution-V.  The 
specific form of analytical function for the nested 
Weibull distribution is given as 
where t0V and V are obtained from Eqs. 2 3a 
Applications for the Nested Probability Model 
To  obtain  the  nested  probability  model  we 
first analyzed the relations between the parameters 
for  distributions  associated  with  the  variations  in 
morphology and interfacial strength. Subsequently 
we  used  these  relations  to  obtain  the  analytical 
form  of  the  final  probability.  In  experiments 
however  the  approach  is  often  reversed.  For 
example  PBX  samples  with  perfect  HMX-binder 
interfaces have very small or negligible variations 
in interfacial strength. The probability distribution 
from this sample set is due to random morphology 
which  is  equivalent  to  Distribution-U  in  our 
model.  On  the  other  hand  PBX  samples  with 
imperfect  HMX-binder  interfaces  will  provide  a 
probability distribution due to the combined effect 
of variations in bonding strength and variations in 
morphology.  The  probability  in  this  case  is 
equivalent  to  the  final  nested  probability  in  our 
experiments  requires  the  inverse  approach  that 
starts  with  the  final  combined  data  to  obtain  the 
relations between the effects of individual sources 
of heterogeneities. 
As  an  example  for  the  application  of  the 
nested  probability  model  we  use  experimental 
data obtained by Subero-Couroyer et al. 5. They 
the  mechanical  failure  strength  of 
catalyst  pellets  under  compressive  loading.  Twoparameter  Weibull  function  was  used  to  analyze 
the effects of process parameters and defects such 
as drying procedure macroporosity or air bubbles. 
Here  we  use  two  data  setsone  set  from  fresh 
and used samples and the other set from samples 
with  macropores  denoted  as  F1M1D1  and 
without macropores denoted as F1M0D1. 
to  used  catalyst  using 
Subero-Couroyer et al. 5 reported that used 
catalyst  has  lower  failure  strength  and  wider 
spread  of  probability  than  fresh  catalyst  does 
resulting in changes of Weibull parameters m and  
.  The  probability  distribution  for  fresh  catalyst 
group  is  equivalent  to  Distribution-U  and  the 
probability  distribution  for  used  catalyst  group  is 
equivalent  to  the  final  nested  probability.  To 
analyze  the  transition  of  strength  from  fresh 
probability  model  we  make 
assumptions.  One  is  that  Weibull  modulus  m  of 
Distribution-U.  Second  assumption 
samples  with  relatively  low  strength  in  the  fresh 
catalyst  group  become  used  samples  they  will 
exhibit relatively low strength in the used catalyst 
group. For samples with relatively high strength in 
the fresh group if they degrade they will exhibit 
relatively  high  strength  in  the  used  group.  Third 
assumption  follows  a  linear  relationship  between 
the strength in the fresh group and the strength of 
the  corresponding  samples  in  the  used  group. 
Based  on  the  second  and  third  assumptions  the 
relation  between  Distribution-U  and  DistributionV  is  plotted  in  Fig.  4  and  the  analytical  form  is 
where 50U is an average median strength in the 
fresh  group.  CU  is  a  strength  of  the  individual 
sample  and 50V  is  an  average median  strength 
of  used  catalyst  samples  for  corresponding  CV. 
Parameters  and  are fitting constants where  is 
a non-negative value. Equation 5 is essentially an 
equivalent  form  of  Eq.  3a.  Since  the  twoparameter  Weibull  function  is  utilized  for  the 
analysis  instead  of  three-parameter  function  only 
Eq. 3a is required and Eq. 3b is disregarded. 
the  degradation  affects 
Equation 5 with the fitting constants  and  
strength  of  individual  catalyst  particle.  Figures 
6a-d  illustrate  the  effect  of  degradation  of 
catalyst.  Figure  6a  shows 
distribution from fresh catalyst group. If a sample 
having  strength  of  CU    5  MPa  in  Fig.  11a 
becomes  degraded  the  probability  distribution  of 
the  strength  of  the  particle  would  follow  the 
distribution shown in Fig. 6b. The same process 
can be applied to samples having CU  8 MPa and 
CU  13 MPa in the fresh catalyst group and the 
probability  of  the  strength  of  the  corresponding 
used  particles  would  follow  the  distributions 
shown in Fig. 6c and d respectively. 
Fig. 4  Relation between Distribution-U and DistributionV 
By using Eq. 4 and Eq. 5 with properly chosen 
constants    and    we  can  obtain  the  nested 
distribution for the  used catalyst group as plotted 
in Fig. 5. Parameters used in this plot are listed in 
Fig.  6    Effect  of  degradation  a  Distribution-V  from  a 
sample with CU  5 MPa originally weak strength b 
Distribution-V  from  a  sample  with  CU    8  MPa 
originally  average  strength  c  Distribution-V  from  a 
sample with CU  13 MPa originally strong strength 
the  application  of 
probability  has  focused  on  the  two-parameter 
Weibull  function  for  the  analysis  above  threeparameter Weibull function can also be used for a 
closer match with experimental data.  
It  is  observed  in  Ref.  5  that  particles  with 
macropores  denoted  as  F1M1D1  have  similar 
average strengths but narrow spread of probability 
Fig. 5  Comparison between probability from used catalyst 
red and nested probability green
Table 2. Parameters in Eq. 5. 
as  compared  to  particles  without  macropores 
denoted  as  F1M0D1.  This  trend  is  analyzed 
the  3-parameter  Weibull  function  and 
nested  probability  model.  Figure  7  shows  the 
distribution of nested probability model in green 
and  Weibull  fitting  for  the  experimental  data  in 
red.  Parameters  listed  in  Table.  3  provide  the 
closest  match  between  the  nested  probability  and 
the experimental result in Fig. 7.  
  Crushing  probability  for  samples  without 
macropores  blue  with  macropores  red  and  nested 
Table 2. Parameters in Eq. 3 and Eq. 4. 
Small value of   0.28 means the slope of 
the  probability  becoming  stiffer  small    of 
Weibull  parameter  indicating  that  introducing 
homogeneous  which  agrees  with  the  explanation 
The analysis carried out in this paper concerns 
two types of variations. The first type of variations 
is in microstructural morphology and the second is 
in  interfacial  bonding  strength.  Each  source  of 
variations  causes  a  degree  of  randomness  in 
distribution  of  ignition  time.  Both  sources  of 
variations influence on hotspot evolution which in 
turn  results  in  randomness  in  ignition  times.  The 
effect  of  each  source  of  variations  is  quantified 
separately  and  the  final  probability  distribution 
variations is predicted using the nested probability 
to  combined  effect  of 
For  an  application  of  the  nested  probability 
model  experimental  data  performed  by  SuberoCouroyer  et  al. 5 are  used.  The  analysis for  the 
actual  experiment  requires  the  inverse  approach. 
Starting  from  final  combined  data  we  extracted 
the  relations  between  the  first  source  and  the 
second  source  of  variations.  By  using  the  nested 
probability  model  we  have  been  able  to  separate 
the  effect  of  degradation  and 
The  authors  gratefully  acknowledge  support 
the  Defense  Threat  Reduction  Agency 
DTRA  and  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory 
AFRL  at  the  Eglin  AFB  DISTRIBUTION  A 
approved for public release distribution unlimited 
1  A.  J.  Goupee  and  S.  S.  Vel  Multiscale 
heterogeneous  materials  Part 
Materials  Science  vol.  48  pp.  39-53  Mar 
2  S.  S.  Vel  and  A.  J.  Goupee  Multiscale 
heterogeneous materials Part I Microstructure 
and  homogenization  of 
material properties Computational Materials 
Science vol. 48 pp. 22-38 Mar 2010. 
3  K.  Yanase  and  J.  W.  Ju  Effective  Elastic 
Moduli  of  Spherical  Particle  Reinforced 
Composites Containing Imperfect Interfaces 
International  Journal  of  Damage  Mechanics 
vol. 21 pp. 97-127 Jan 2012. 
4  S.  Kim  A.  Barua  Y.  Horie  and  M.  Zhou 
Ignition  probability  of  polymer-bonded 
explosives accounting for multiple sources of 
material  stochasticity  Journal  of  Applied 
Physics vol. 115 pp. - 2014. 
5  C. Subero-Couroyer M. Ghadiri N. Brunard 
and  F.  Kolenda  Weibull  analysis  of  quasistatic  crushing  strength  of  catalyst  particles 
Chemical  Engineering  Research    Design 
vol. 81 pp. 953-962 Sep 2003. 
6  A.  Barua  S.  Kim  Y.  Horie  and  M.  Zhou 
Prediction  of  probabilistic  ignition  behavior 
microstructural  stochasticity  Journal  of 
Applied  Physics  vol.  113  pp.  184907-20 
7  C.  M.  Tarver  S.  K.  Chidester  and  A.  L. 
Nichols  Critical  conditions  for  impact-  and 
shock-induced  hot  spots  in  solid  explosives 
Journal  of  Physical  Chemistry  vol.  100  pp. 
5794-5799 Apr 4 1996. 
8  A.  Barua  S.  Kim  Y.  Horie  and  M.  Zhou 
Ignition criterion for heterogeneous energetic 
materials  based  on  hotspot  size-temperature 
threshold  Journal  of  Applied  Physics  vol. 
Do you expect real PBX materials to have as much 
random  fluctuation  in  bonding  strength  as  you 
assume in your model? 
Reply by Seokpum Kim 
The assumption of 20 of standard deviation for 
the  random  fluctuations  in  bonding  strength  is 
based  on  the  cohesive  stress  of  PBX  9501 
measured by Tan et al. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 53 
2005  18921917  which  shows  a  scatter  of  1020 from the linear fit of the data. Chemical Equilibrium and Carbon Kinetics in Explosives 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
7000 East Avenue Livermore CA 94550 
Abstract.  Chemical  reactions  freeze-out  and  carbon  kinetics  usually  assumed  to 
include  nucleation  phase  transformation  and  coagulation  have  long  been  invoked  to 
explain  deviations  of  the  energy  delivered  by  detonating  explosives  e.g.  measured  in 
cylinder  experiments  from  ideal  behavior.  Chemical  equilibrium  hydrodynamic 
calculations  of  cylinder  detonation  for  PETN  a  high  energy  low  carbon  content 
explosive show that gas phase chemistry freeze-out is not a major effect determining 
energy  output  and  it  probably  occurs  at  relatively  low  temperatures  1500K  as 
proposed  decades  ago.  In  carbon  producing  explosives  often  modeled  using  full 
chemistry freeze-out temperatures higher that 2000K chemical reactions between the 
condensed carbon and the gas products are most likely to be the limiting steps in energy 
release.  Indeed  comparisons  of  calculated  and  recovered  carbon  amounts  indicate  that 
temperatures  around  2300K. 
Hydrodynamic  simulations  using  a  simple  chemical  kinetics  model  for  the  transfer  of 
carbon to the gas phase reproduce both energy output and carbon production of TNT a 
graphite-producing  explosive  and  COMP-B  a  diamond-producing  explosive. 
Calculations that also include the diamond - graphite phase transformation suggest that it 
is a relatively small contribution to energy output. A new carbon aggregation model is 
introduced  and  parameterized  using  experimental  data  but  its  full  application  to 
detonation requires additional experimental andor simulation guidance. 
likely  slowdown  significantly  at 
The  properties  of  detonating  high  explosives 
are determined by complex physical and chemical 
phenomena which are not yet fully elucidated and 
therefore  remain  challenging  to  predict  with  high 
accuracy.  The  amount  of  experimental  data  that 
has  been  accumulating  over  more  than  a  halfcentury  on  a  variety  of  energetic  materials 
undergoing  detonation  is  considerable  albeit  it  is 
primarily  focused  on  a  few  quantities  of  direct 
practical  relevance  e.g.  detonation  velocity  wall 
velocity  in  cylinder  experiments  etc.  Current 
methods  for  modeling  detonation  1-5  aim  to 
organize  and  correlate  both  the  experimental  and 
the  more  recent  simulational  observations  6 
according  to  fundamental  physics  and  chemistry 
principles  and  thus  to  develop  an  understanding 
that  goes  beyond  the  usual  parameterizing  of 
empirical  models  for  individual  explosives  based 
on  experimental  data.  The  ability  to  predict 
explosive  behavior  e.g.  momentum  and  energy 
delivered  under  a  wide  range  of  practical 
conditions  sometimes  even  in  the  absence  of 
assumption of  chemical equilibrium at detonation 
conditions  has  proved  to  be  a  fruitful  modeling 
approach  particularly  when  combined  with 
theories  of  detonation 
statistical  mechanics 
equilibrium  picture  that  has  emerged  in  the  last 
decade  for  reacting  CHNO  explosives  especially 
from  accurate  quantum  molecular  dynamics 
traditional  one  which 
envisions  the  rapid  formation  of  stable  molecular 
products  such  as  H2O  N2  CO2  CO  etc.  Ionic 
products turn out for example to play a major role 
in  determining  behavior  at  high  pressures  and 
temperatures  6  7.  It  is  important  to  incorporate 
these  concepts  as  faithfully  as  possible  in  the 
prediction  of  detonation  properties  for  two  main 
reasons.  First  a  chemical  equilibrium  approach 
though  in  principle  very  well  defined  from  a 
thermodynamic  standpoint  8  is  truly  predictive 
only if it describes the actual state of the system in 
terms  of  the  species  abundance  not  just  the 
equation  of  state.  Second  although  chemical 
equilibrium  may  not  be  applicable  under  all 
conditions  it  serves  as  a  fundamental  reference 
state and its realistic representation is essential for 
building predictive chemical and physical kinetics 
models. The latter reason is particularly important 
for  energy  delivery  calculations  which  often 
involve expanded lower pressure and temperature 
thermodynamic  states  that  may  only  reach  partial 
chemical  equilibrium  and  whose  properties  are 
determined by slow kinetic effects. Since typical 
CHNO explosives have a negative oxygen balance 
thus  produce  condensed  carbon  carbon 
kinetics  effects  usually  assumed  to  encompass 
nucleation phase transformation and coagulation 
have long been recognized as playing an important 
role  in  determining  the  detonation  properties  and 
energy  output  of  these  materials  9-13.  The  socalled  freeze-out  of  chemical  reactions  at  low 
temperatures  has  also  been  often  invoked  for 
virtually  all  explosives  to  reconcile  chemical 
equilibrium  predictions  with  observed  long  time 
detonation calorimetry and energy output 1415. 
In  the  following  we  employ  modern  chemical 
equilibrium  methods  with  realistic  speciation 
hydrodynamickinetics  calculations  to  understand 
the relationship between these two effects for both 
ideal  and  non-ideal  explosives.  We  find 
reaction  products  amounts 
particular that the slowdown of chemical reactions 
in the gas phase is unlikely to play a dominant role 
in  energy  release  and  that  condensed  carbon 
production and reactions with the gas products are 
major constraints for predicting the performance of 
explosives. We illustrate this with calculations for 
PETN TNT COMP-B. We also discuss the effect 
of the diamond  graphite transformation and the 
potential contribution of carbon aggregation to late 
time energy release in the context of a new kinetic 
Chemical kinetics effects on energy release 
Standard  detonation  theory  as  proposed  by 
Chapman  and  Jouguet 
detonation  chemistry  as  a  set  of 
reactions occurring behind the leading shock front 
which involve primarily small molecular products 
resulting  from  the  fast  decomposition  of  the 
energetic material they are expected to equilibrate 
on  nanosecond  or  sub-nanosecond    time  scales 
resulting  in  reaction  zones  orders  of  magnitude 
below  a  millimeter  and  essentially  ideal  behavior 
for  normal  charge  sizes  i.e.  a  few  centimeters 
large. Not surprisingly such behavior is associated 
with  high  energy  content  explosives  which  are 
almost  oxygen  balanced  with  PETN  being  the 
prototypical  example. 
performed  in  the  last  decade  67  confirm  to  a 
large  extent  the  predominance  of  fast  chemical 
reactions  in  these  materials  but  also  provide 
evidence  that  reactivity  at  high  pressures  and 
occurrence  of  charged  species  e.g.  H  OH-  etc. 
Statistical  mechanics  models  for  such  complex 
fluid  mixtures  containing  both  uncharged  and 
charged  components  can  be  developed  by 
systematically accounting for the short range e.g. 
exp-6  electrostatic  dipolar  and 
induction  polarization  interactions  between  the 
the  Helmholtz  free 
molecular  products  with 
energy  Ffluid  written  as 
contributions 1-517 
statistical mechanics description of the detonation 
products of CHNO explosives 
where  the  Gs  are  Gibbs  free  energies  and 
Gnanocarbon  is  a  sum  over  all  condensed  phases   
diamond  graphite  liquids  ni  is  the  set  of 
numbers of moles of molecular species in the fluid 
phase  and  condensed  carbon  phases.    Standard 
chemical  equilibrium  assumptions  leading  to  the 
stoichiometrically-constrained  minimization  of  G 
with  respect  to  the  product  concentrations  at 
constant pressure P and temperature T yield the 
full  thermodynamics  of  such  reacting  energetic 
materials  including  their  detonation  properties. 
Indeed  calculated  detonation  velocities  and 
pressures  for  a  classical  explosive  such  as  RDX 
in  good  agreement  with  experimental 
measurements 37  see Figs. 1 and 2.  
The  predicted  C-J  and  expanded  state 
speciation  for  PETN    see  Fig.  3  illustrates  well 
the  chemical  equilibrium  picture  yielded  by  such 
calculations i significant amounts of ionic species 
are produced at the detonation point in agreement 
measurements  623  but  rapid  recombination 
occurs  on  expansion  with  the  standard  neutral 
products N2 H2O CO2 CO etc.  dominating the 
chemistry  along  the  principal  adiabat  ii  on 
expansion from the C-J point chemical equilibrium 
favors  the  transfer  of  carbon  from  the  condensed 
state to the gaseous products.  
The  stable  gaseous  molecular  products  N2 
H2O CO2 CO  have been recovered in PETN 
detonation calorimeter experiments 14 following 
full expansion VV0200 and re-equilibration on 
very  long  -  tens  of  minutes  -  time  scales. 
Comparisons  of  the  recovered  quantities  with 
simple  chemical  equilibrium  estimates  of  the 
expected  amounts  have  been  used  to  suggest  that 
reactions  essentially  cease  below 
temperatures of approximately 1500K-1800K. 
This  model  for  the  fluid  gaseous  detonation 
products  is  currently  the  most  realistic  picture  of 
chemical  speciation  and  thermodynamics  at  the 
pressure  and  temperature  conditions  encountered 
Since  most  high  explosives  are  characterized 
by an overabundance of carbon and therefore their 
detonation results in  the production of condensed 
thermodynamic  description  of  the  reacted  state 
also  needs  to  include  appropriate  models  for  the 
carbon  phases.  They  are  typically  parameterized 
shockwave  phase  diagram  experimental  data 
18-20.  The  production  of 
condensed phases poses a conceptual challenge to 
the C-J detonation picture since their occurrence in 
bulk  form  is  necessarily  much  slower  than  the 
chemical  reactions 
involving  small  molecular 
products and would therefore seem to imply very 
large  reaction  zones.  High  explosives  with  a  low 
and moderate negative oxygen balance e.g. HMX 
nevertheless  behave  quite  ideally  suggesting  that 
the C-J framework remains to a large extent valid. 
These  two  observations  can  be  reconciled  if  the 
nucleation processes leading to the appearance of 
condensed  phases  are  assumed  to  be  very  rapid 
and  chemical  equilibrium  at  the  C-J  state  is 
achieved  with  these  small  nano-sized  nuclei  not 
with  the  bulk  phases  13.  In  fact  much  better 
calculations  and  experiments  is  obtained  for  the 
shock  behavior  of  a  variety  of  carbon-rich 
compounds if the condensed carbon is assumed to 
be produced in the form of particles with a size of 
a  few  nanometers  and  the  surface  free  energy 
contributions important for such small clusters are 
suitably taken into account 13.  This approach is 
consistent with the characteristic properties of the 
carbon  recovered  from  the  detonation  of  many 
explosives  21.  It  also  predicts  subtle  effects  in 
the position of the carbon phase diagram e.g. the 
boundary between graphite and diamond is shifted 
to higher pressures for small particles 13 which 
are  supported  by  experiments  and  simulations 
The combination of the fluid phase model and 
nanocarbon  thermodynamics  leads  to  a  complete 
that the proposed gas phase chemistry freeze-out 
is a major factor determining the energy output of 
the explosive in the crucial range of a few up to 
10  volume  expansions.  Subsequent  work  on 
explosives  other  than  PETN  has  nevertheless 
employed full chemistry freeze-out temperatures 
as high as 2200K 15 essentially turning it into an 
adjustable empirical parameter that can be used to 
control  the  calculated  energy  release  for  all 
explosives  with  the  goal  of  matching  detonation 
cylinder experimental results. 
Fig.  1  RDX  detonation  velocity  as  a  function  of 
initial  density  experiments  black  triangles  and 
chemical equilibrium calculations solid blue line. 
Fig. 3 Concentrations of major products along the 
PETN 01.76gcc principal isentrope chemical 
concentrations  measured 
calorimeter color circles. The vertical dashed line 
the  C-J  point  volume.  The 
temperature at VV05 is approximately 1600K. 
Cylinder  detonation  experiments  for  PETN 
provide  the  best  experimental  data  to  test  the 
to  which  deviations  from  gas  phase 
chemical equilibrium may affect the rate of energy 
release.  These  are  shown  in  Fig.  4  together  with 
hydrodynamic  simulations 
138 is the equation of state driver 27. Since we 
are  only  interested  in  the  energy  output  on 
expansion there is no reason to resolve and model 
the  PETN  detonation  reaction  zone  which  is 
programmed  burn  calculations  thus  assuming 
that the reaction zone is of the order of the shock 
width  in  the  numerical  integration  scheme.  The 
preset detonation velocity was the calculated one 
Fig. 2 RDX detonation pressure as a function of 
initial  density  experiments  black  squares  and 
chemical equilibrium calculations solid blue line. 
The present results are consistent with such an 
effect  see  for  example  Fig.  3  where 
temperature  at  VV05  is  approximately  1600K. 
Precise comparisons of the detonation calorimeter 
recovered  gas  products  with  calculations  are 
however difficult since significant chemistry  may 
occur  in  the  experiments  after  full  expansion. 
Kinetic calculations 24 have placed this so-called 
chemistry  freeze-out  at  the  low  end  of  the 
1500K-1800K  temperature  range.  It  is  worth 
noting  that  such  calculations  only  attempted  to 
elucidate  the  non-equilibrium  chemistry  effects 
after full expansion and there is no direct evidence 
D    8.20  kms  which  is  within  1  of  the 
Fig.  4  Wall  velocity  for  a  PETN  01.766gcc 
cylinder  detonation  experiment  39  solid  black 
line and simulations solid blue line.  
The  comparison  between  experiments  and 
simulations  performed  under 
equilibrium  assumptions 
is  very  good.  This 
suggests that gas phase chemical reactions remain 
sufficiently fast relative to the expansion rates up 
to sizable volume ratios t10 s corresponds for 
example  to  VV0    10  and  that  reasonable  gas 
phase  chemistry  freeze-out  temperatures  are 
likely  to  be  relatively  low.  Gas  phase  nonequilibrium  chemistry  effects  are  probably  due 
primarily  to  the  slowdown  of  CO  oxidation  as 
evidenced for example by its overabundance in 
detonation  calorimeter  experiments 
reasonable freeze-out temperatures appear to be 
around  1500K.  It  is  also  worth  noting  that  the 
detonation  velocity  of  a  concentrated  solution  of 
predicted  with  very  good  accuracy  by  chemical 
equilibrium calculations 25 even though its C-J 
temperature  is  lower  than  1600K.  When  taken 
together  these  results  suggest  that  if  chemistry 
experimentally  measured  energy  delivered  by  a 
CHNO explosive this is unlikely to be due to gas 
nonequilibrium  physicochemical  effects  related  to  its 
condensed  carbon  production  probably  play  a 
temperatures  much  higher 
major role. Such effects can involve the condensed 
carbon  alone  e.g.  diamond-graphite  phase 
transformation and carbon clusters aggregation as 
well  as  chemical  reactions  between  the  carbon 
phase  and  the  gas  products.  Since  such  chemical 
reactions  can  only  occur  at  the  surface  of  the 
carbon particles they are more likely to hinder the 
establishment  of  chemical  equilibrium  than  gas 
phase  reactions  similar  effects  are  known  for 
example to dominate the behavior of Al in organic 
The amount of condensed carbon produced by 
an  explosive  upon  detonation  is  a  function  of  its 
oxygen  balance  energy  content  and 
conditions.  The  predicted  C-J  state  carbon 
production  be  it  diamond  graphite  or  liquid  is 
shown  for  example  in  Fig.  5  for  a  set  of  wellknown materials with negative oxygen balance. 
Fig.  5  Carbon  production  at  the  C-J  point  for 
It is worth noting that the results correlate well 
with  the  degree  of  non-ideality  as  commonly 
understood  for  these  compounds.  Just  as  in  the 
case  of  PETN  on  expansion  from  the  C-J  state 
chemical  equilibrium  calculations  for  carbon-rich 
explosives  e.g.  TNT  mixtures  indicate  a  shift  of 
the  carbon  from  the  condensed  state  to  the  gas 
products  with  sizable  energetic  consequences. 
How  important  any  slowdown  in  this  carbon 
burn  is  for  an  explosive  can  be  partly  assessed 
from  the  amount  of  condensed  carbon  recovered 
post-detonation. This is facilitated by the fact that 
detonations  of  charges  in  closed  tanks  have  been 
set-up  precisely  with  the  goal  of  recovering  the 
carbon  particularly  in  the  form  of  nanodiamonds 
We show in Fig. 6 a comparison of the carbon 
recovered  from  the  detonation  of  TNTRDX  and 
TNTHMX mixtures using both fairly small 26 
and  quite  large  charges  21  with  chemical 
temperatures  along  the  C-J  isentrope.  The  lower 
temperature  1800K  is  the  most  probable  upper 
bound for a gas phase chemistry freeze-out 14. 
The  second  temperature  2300K  yields  the  best 
agreement  with  the  amounts  of  carbon  actually 
Fig.  6  Comparison  of  recovered  carbon  amounts 
and  values  predicted  at  different  points  along  the 
C-J  isentrope  for  TNTRDX  and  TNTHMX 
The results suggest that the reactions between 
responsible  for  the  transfer  of  carbon  to  the  gas 
phase  slow  down  substantially  at  significantly 
higher  temperatures  than  the  gas  phase  reactions. 
To fully understand the consequences of this effect 
for energy output we look at two materials TNT a 
60RDX40TNT  which  produces  a  large 
amount of nanodiamonds 21. The energy output 
of  TNT  has  been  thoroughly  studied  and  good 
representations  of  its  C-J  adiabat  have  been 
derived from cylinder experiments using the JWL 
equation of state format 15. We show in Fig. 7 a 
comparison  of  the  experimentally  derived  JWL 
with  full  chemical  equilibrium  calculations  as 
well  as  calculations  with  gas  phase  chemical 
equilibrium  and  carbon  graphite  frozen  at  the 
C-J  state.  They  are  consistent  with  the  idea  of 
interrupted  carbon  burn  on  expansion  from  the 
Fig.  7  Comparison  of  TNT  01.63gcc  JWL 
experiments  15  circles  with  full  chemical 
equilibrium  black  solid  line  and  partial  fluid 
phase  only  chemical  equilibrium  calculations 
To  fully  quantify  this  effect  we  performed 
hydrodynamickinetics calculations 27 of a TNT 
cylinder  detonation  experiment.  We  considered 
only  two  kinetically  controlled  reactions  i  the 
irreversible  decomposition  of  TNT  to  products 
yielding  the  C-J  predicted  amount  of  graphite 
C7H5N3O64.8CgraphiteGas Products and ii 
the reversible transfer of graphite to the gas phase 
CgraphiteCgas  with  Cgas  maintained  in 
chemical equilibrium with the molecular products 
in  the  gas  mixture  given  that  the  gas  phase 
reactions  likely  equilibrate  faster  than  reactions 
involving condensed carbon  the latter assumption 
is reasonably well-founded. The second reaction is 
a  simplified  representation  of 
chemical reactions between condensed carbon and 
CCO22CO CH2OCOH2 etc. This choice 
is mainly dictated by practical considerations since 
not sufficiently is known about the high pressures 
and  temperatures  chemical  kinetics  let  alone 
surface  chemistry  effects 
conceptual representation.  
to  enable  detailed 
instead  for  a  reasonable 
The  TNT  decomposition  reaction  is  modeled 
with a pressure dependent rate Bp2 27 adjusted 
to match detonation velocities at different cylinder 
sizes.  For  the  second  rate  we  adopt  a  simple 
Arrhenius  kinetics  model  Aexp-EakBT  neither 
the  activation  barrier  Ea  nor  the  pre-factor  A  are 
known  and  no  simulation  data  are  available  for 
carbon  surface  chemistry 
reactions  at  high 
pressures  and  temperatures  that  could  be  used  to 
guide this modeling. A 15000K activation barrier 
likely related at least in part to surface chemistry 
is  suggested  by  an  analysis  of  early  time  carbon 
aggregation data in TATB 28. In the absence of 
any other information we adopt this value here as a 
starting  point  and  find  that  by  adjusting  the  prefactor the experimental cylinder wall velocity can 
be very well reproduced by simulations  see Fig. 
8.  Moreover  the  amount  of  condensed  carbon 
graphite in the expanding wave appears to reach 
a plateau which is also in good agreement with the 
experimentally recovered values 21  see Fig. 9. 
Fig.  8  Wall  velocity  for  a  TNT  cylinder 
detonation  1inch  diameter  Cu  01.612  gcc 
experiment 39 black line and simulations blue 
We now turn to the modeling of COMP-B a 
higher  detonating  pressure  explosive  than  TNT. 
We  employ  the  same  kinetic  modeling  paradigm 
as before i.e. explosive decomposition and carbon 
transfer to the gas phase. Here however the carbon 
produced at the C-J point is predicted to be in the 
diamond  phase.  Indeed  carbon  recovered  from 
COMP-B detonations is mostly nanodiamond 21 
and consequently graphite is not included at all in 
the  calculations  see  also  below.  The  explosive 
decomposition is modeled using the same pressure 
dependent  rate  law  while  the  second  reaction 
CdiamondCgas  is  modeled  as  before  using 
Arrhenius kinetics initially we employ in fact the 
exact same prefactor A and activation energy Ea as 
for the TNT graphite reaction. 
Fig.  9  Carbon  production  behind 
detonation front from simulations solid blue line 
dashed  line  is  the  amount  of  carbon  recovered 
from enclosed detonations. 
The  agreement  between  simulations  and 
the  cylinder  wall 
velocities  quantifying  the  energy  output  is  quite 
good    see  Fig.  10.  Although  even  better 
agreement can be obtained by further adjusting the 
kinetic  parameters  this  result  lends  a  surprising 
degree of generality to a complex chemical process 
which should depend in part on the carbon phase 
and  particulars  of  the  explosive  chemistry.  In 
expanding products reaches again a plateau which 
is  consistent  with  the  total  amount  of  carbon 
diamond    graphite 
detonation  and  expansion  21    see  Fig.  11.  We 
also  show  in  Fig.  10  a  calculation  assuming  full 
chemical  equilibrium  following  the  kinetically 
controlled  decomposition  of  the  explosive  which 
strongly over predicts the energy delivery as well 
as  one  where  the  amount  of  carbon  produced  on 
expansion  is  frozen  when  it  reaches  the  total 
the  diamond  mass  fraction 
recovered value. This latter calculation agrees very 
well  with  the  experimental  result  suggesting  that 
the  carbon  transfer  chemical  kinetics  may  be 
slowing  down  on  expansion  even  more  abruptly 
the  assumed  Arrhenius  kinetics  and 
justifying the use of a simple chemical equilibrium 
freeze-out  model  for  reactions  between  the 
condensed carbon and the gas products.  
Fig.  10  Wall  velocity  for  a  COMP-B  cylinder 
detonation  1  inch  diameter  Cu  01.691  gcc 
experiment 39 black line chemical equilibrium 
calculation  blue  line  Arrhenius  kinetics    see 
text green line carbon freeze simulation  see 
Diamondgraphite phase transformation effects 
As previously noted the COMP-B calculations 
do not take into account the phase transformation 
thermodynamically  favored  as  the  pressures  and 
temperatures  decrease 
Experiments show that over 80 of the carbon is 
recovered  in  the  form  of  nanodiamonds  21 
indicating that this transition is kinetically limited. 
The  very  good  agreement  between  experimental 
results and simulations that constrain the carbon to 
the  diamond  phase  suggests  that  the  diamond  - 
graphite  transformation  while  important  from  a 
comparatively  less  important  for  energy  delivery 
in  COMP-B  and  likely  other  diamond  producing 
materials  than  the  reactions  between  condensed 
carbon and gas products. Indeed simulations that 
include both diamond and graphite and model this 
transformation  using  Arrhenius  kinetics  with  a 
15000K activation energy and pre-factor chosen to 
diamondgraphite  ratio  21    see  Fig.  12  yield 
the  calculation  using 
diamond alone. Naturally this simple kinetics does 
not  capture  the  complex  features  of  solid-solid 
phase transformations at high pressures see e.g. 
Ref. 28 but the result supports the idea that the 
diamond  to  graphite  transition  is  not  a  major 
contributor  to  energy  release  in  carbon-rich  high 
Fig.  11  Carbon  production  behind  the  COMP-B 
detonation front from simulations solid blue line 
experimentally  recovered  carbon  dashed  black 
Fig. 12 Diamond and graphite production behind 
the  COMP-B  detonation 
diamond  solid  blue  line  graphite  solid  green 
line experimentally recovered amounts diamond 
black line graphite dashed black line.   
Carbon aggregation effects 
The properties of nanocarbon recovered from 
detonations  1121  suggest  that  carbon  particles 
continue  to  grow  in  the  detonation  wave  of 
explosives    possibly  resulting  in  slow  energy 
release  10.  The  most  likely  growth  mechanism 
for  the  carbon  nanoclusters  is  diffusion-limited 
aggregation  or  coagulation  the  process  has  been 
experimentally  confirmed  up 
timescales 3031 and more recently studied using 
molecular  dynamics  simulations  33. 
original analysis 10 of this phenomenon yielded 
an  asymptotic  time  dependence  of  t-13  for  the 
energy contribution due to the decrease in surface 
this  expected  behavior  has  been 
incorporated in an approximate way in detonation 
models  of  TATB  32.  A  scaling  analysis  of  the 
aggregation  process  28  shows  that  the  cluster 
size n grows linearly with a scaled time  n  no 
 where pa is the cluster adhesion probability n0 is 
the  size  of  the  initial  carbon  nuclei    is  the  gas 
products viscosity  is the mass density and N is 
the amount of condensed carbon per unit mass. As 
a result the corresponding energy release varies as 
-13  not  t-13  28  and  thus  has  a  complex  local 
The  energetic  effect  of  aggregation  can  be 
in  hydrodynamic  calculations  of 
it  as  a  quasi-phase 
transformation  of  the  carbon  nuclei  28  which 
have  significant  surface  energy  13  to  bulk 
transformation rate can be written as 
 where Nb and Nn are the bulk and carbon nuclei 
amounts  per  unit  mass  respectively  and  N   
NbNn.    An  analysis  of  the  cluster  growth  in 
TATB  detonation  yields 
dependence  on  the  scaled  time    see  Fig.  13  at 
least for the few recorded microseconds 30 and 
allows  the  parameterization  of  the  model.  The 
adhesion probability pa  exp-EakBT is found in 
particular  to  correspond  at  early  times  to  an 
activation barrier of approximately 15000K.  
Fig. 13 Growth of carbon clusters as a function of 
the  detonation  and 
expansion of TATB experiments versus diffusionlimited aggregation model.  
The  inclusion  of  carbon  aggregation  kinetics 
in  simulations  of  detonation  is  unfortunately 
computationally  by 
the  concurrent  chemical 
reactions  between  the  condensed  carbon  and  the 
gas  products  which  as  shown  above  play  an 
important role in the energy release of carbon-rich 
understood  cluster  adhesion  and  re-equilibration 
effects.  The  aggregation  effect  on  energy  release 
may  be  relatively  more  important  on  long  time 
scales for lower detonation temperature explosives 
such  as  TATB  but  in  this  case  uncertainties 
remain  with  regard  to  the  properties  of  the 
condensed  phase  precipitated  at  detonation 
conditions 34 and perhaps even its composition. 
Experimental  and  simulation 
this  process  could  make  such 
modeling possible in the near future. 
The  concept  of  chemical  equilibrium  has 
proved  to  be  useful  for  predicting  the  detonation 
properties  of  high  explosives  e.g.  detonation 
velocities  but  its  understanding  continues  to 
evolve based on both experimental results and MD 
simulations.  Thermodynamic  modeling 
includes  charged  molecular  species  provides  at 
present the most realistic description of detonation 
products.  Equation  of  state  and  speciation 
accuracy  are  both  necessary  to  achieve  precise 
the  behavior  of  detonating 
energetic materials particularly on expansion from 
the  Chapman-Jouguet  point  where  decreasing 
temperatures  and  pressures  lead  to  slower  kinetic 
rates  and  possible  non-equilibrium  effects. 
reactions  freeze-out  and  carbon 
kinetics  usually  assumed  to  include  nucleation 
phase  transformation  and  coagulation  have  long 
been mentioned to explain deviations of the energy 
output  of  explosives  as  measured  in  cylinder 
ideal  behavior.  Speciation 
hydrodynamic  calculations  of  cylinder  detonation 
for  PETN  a  high  energy  low  carbon  content 
explosive suggest that gas phase chemical kinetics 
slowdown is  likely effective  only at temperatures 
around 1500K as originally proposed decades ago. 
In  carbon-producing  explosives  usually  modeled 
temperatures  chemical  reactions  between 
condensed  carbon  and  the  gas  products  are  most 
likely  to  be  the  limiting  steps  in  energy  release. 
Hydrodynamickinetics  simulations  of  TNT  a 
graphite  producing  explosive  and  COMP-B  a 
diamond producing explosive strongly support this 
scenario.  Both  energy  output  and  carbon 
production  are  well  reproduced  using  a  simple 
chemical kinetics model for the transfer of carbon 
to  the  gas  phase  further  study  of  this  process  as 
well as of CO oxidation kinetics at high pressures 
and temperatures would be desirable. Calculations 
transformation suggest that it has a relatively small 
effect  on  energy  output.  A  new  physically 
consistent carbon aggregation model is introduced 
and parameterized using experimental data but its 
full application to explosives for which it may be 
I  thank  L.  Fried  P.  Vitello  and  W.  Kuo  for 
their work on the Cheetah code over the years and 
help  with  hydrodynamic  simulations  and  C. 
Souers  for  providing 
the  cylinder  detonation 
experimental data. This work was performed under 
the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by 
Lawrence  Livermore  National  Laboratory  under 
Contract  DE-AC52-07NA27344  and  was  funded 
the  Advanced  Simulation  and 
Computing  ASC  Program.  The  Joint  DoDDOE 
Munitions  Technology  Development  Program 
JMP  is  gratefully  acknowledged  for  partially 
funding this work.  
Electronic mail sbasteallnl.govShock-Pressure and Pseudo-Entropic Approaches to Explosive Initiation Modeling 
Dynamic Science Incorporated Phoenix AZ
Abstract. The  hot-spot  paradigm  for  explosive  shock  initiation  implies  that  the  overall 
rate  of  reaction  per  unit mass  depends  on  the  number  of  hot  spots  per  unit  mass  the 
average surface area per hot spot and the rate at which the surface regresses. In order to 
improve  the  capabilities  of  the  History  Variable  Reactive  Burn HVRB model  in the
CTH hydrocode extensions to treat short duration shock waves and shock desensitization
were implemented. As formulated the HVRB burn rate is pressure dependent and has no 
explicit representation of hot-spot density. The Phase I extension to HVRB separates the 
hot-spot density a function of shock pressure from the surface regression rate a function 
of  local  pressure. The  Phase  II  extension  introduces  a  pseudo-entropy  on  which  the 
reaction rate depends in a way that preserves the single shock response while modeling 
desensitization  in  a  multiple  shock  environment.    Predictive  improvements  in  modeling 
response  to  short  pulses  produced  by  thin  flyers  and  capabilities  to  represent 
desensitization double shock reflected shock and opposing shocks are demonstrated.
Critique of the State of the Art
Phenomenological Modeling
The hot-spot paradigm provides a generalized 
phenomenological models 
explosives by shock waves and can be summarized 
as  follows  the  action  of  a  shock  wave  on  a 
heterogeneous explosive produces numerous small 
volumes  with  elevated  temperatures  or  hot  spots
stated  without  reference  to  specific  mechanisms 
that  may  create  the  hot  spots  reaction  originates 
in  these  hot  spots  and transitions  to  surface 
burning.  The overall rate of reaction per unit mass 
is the product of the number of hot spots per unit 
mass hot-spot  density  the  average  surface  area 
per  hot  spot  and  the  rate  at  which  the  surface 
The  ideal  model  is  simple  lends  itself  to 
physical  interpretation  that  is  it  follows  the  hotspot  paradigm  and  captures  all  observed 
phenomena. Existing  models  are  less  than  ideal.  
They  may  not  be  simple  enough  to  facilitate 
calibration  especially  when  quick  results  for  a 
number  of  new  materials  are  needed.    They  may 
follow  the  hot-spot  paradigm  incompletely  or  in 
some  cases not  at  all. 
applicability  of  a  model  to additional observed 
phenomena  is  accomplished  via  modifications  or 
by the introduction of new models.  This process is 
far  from  complete. Among  the  phenomena  that 
still need to be addressed are those associated with 
complex  shock  environments  response  to  very 
and  desensitization 
associated with multiple-shock loading. 
Models  may  be  classified  as  single-step  or 
multiple-step.    Representative  single-step models 
include  Forest  Fire1  Ignition  and  Growth2  and 
History Variable Reactive Burn HVRB3 used in 
the CTH4 hydrocode. Multiple-step models use an 
initial  step  representing 
the  rate  of  hot-spot 
creation.  The chemical reaction step then depends 
on  the  evolving  hot  spot  variable. An  early 
example  is  the  Johnson-Tang-Forest56 model  in 
which  the  ignition  of  hot  spots  is  represented  by 
the first step and the continuation and completion 
of  reaction  by  the  second  step.    A  more  recent 
example is the Statistical Hot Spot model.7
The general form taken by many of the singlestep  models  consists  of  one  or  more terms 
describing  the  evolution  of  the  reaction  progress 
variaEOHXVXDOOUHSUHVHQWLQJWKHSURGXFWPDVV
fraction.    Each  term  includes  a  mass-fractiondependent  function  representing  burning  topology 
average  surface  area  per  hot  spot  and  a  statedependent  function  representing  the combined 
the  hot-spot  density  and  surface 
These models do not follow the complete hot-spot 
paradigm  as  they  lump  the  effects  of  surface 
regression and hot spot density into a single factor.
A  typical  pressure-dependent  form  of  the lumped 
factor can be written
model used for surface regression of propellants at 
low  pressures  where  the  pressure  exponent  is  in 
the  neighborhood  of  unity.    In  order  to  match 
sustained shock results for explosive initiation the 
pressure  exponent  must  be  significantly  higher.  
This causes the reaction rate to drop too quickly in 
rarefactions  where  the  regression  rate  ought  to 
decrease but the hot-spot density should not.
Pulsed Shock Loading
The  effect  of  rarefactions  dominates  in  the 
initiation  of  explosives  by  thin  flyers.    Critical 
thin  Mylar  flyers  of  varying 
thickness  were  obtained  by  Weingart et al.8 in 
experiments  using  PBX-9404.    The  results  are 
shown in Figure 1 along with predictions obtained 
using  the  HVRB  CTH  library  calibration9 which 
Figure 1. Critical Velocity as a Function of Thin Mylar Flyer
Thickness for PBX-9404.
is  incorrect and  Ignition  and  Growth 10.    With 
HVRB  the  critical  velocity  tends  to  increase  too 
rapidly  as  the  flyer  thickness  decreases.    Ignition 
and  Growth  shows  the  effects  of  the  multiple 
growth  term in  generating  a  piecewise  linear 
variation in the dependence of critical velocity on 
Shock Desensitization
phenomenological  models  do  not 
address shock desensitization and are not expected 
to  be  accurate  when  this  behavior  is  important.
However  recently  use  of  entropy due  to  shock 
compression in  lieu  of  pressure has  been  adopted
as  a  way  to  remedy  this in  the  CREST  model 
reported by Handley.11
the  entropy  produced  by 
compression increases with reduced magnitude for 
shocks  after  the  first  substituting  the  entropy  of 
the solid phase for the pressure in the reaction rate
expression  will  provide  some  representation  of 
shock  desensitization.    While  tempting  there  are 
several problems with this approach since entropy
is  a  state  function  that  is  determined  by  the 
pressure and temperature equations of state it does 
not  reflect  hot-spot  formation  anymore  than  the 
equations  of  state  do  the  entropy  used  must  be 
that  of  the  solid  phase  due  to  shock  compression 
unfortunate  choices  for  its  two-phase  mixture 
model allow the energy released during reaction to 
Shock  pressure  is  a  material  variable.    The 
HVRB  extension  requires  knowledge  of
pressures  of  the  two  most  recent  shock  waves 
loading  each  material particle. The  most  recent 
value is called the downstream shock pressure psd
and the earlier value is called the upstream shock 
pressure psu.  This is illustrated in Figure 2 for a 
hypothetical doubly  shocked  material  particle.
The  material  is  first  shocked  to  a  pressure  p1 and 
later  to  a  pressure  p2.    Prior  to  the  arrival  of  the 
first  shock  the  upstream  and  downstream  shock 
pressures  are  equal  to  the  ambient  pressure p0.
After  the  arrival  of  the  first  shock  and  before  the 
arrival of the second shock the downstream shock 
pressure  is  equal  to  p1 and  the  upstream  shock 
pressure  is  equal  to  p0. After  the  arrival  of  the 
second  shock the  downstream  shock  pressure  is 
equal  to  p2 and  the  upstream  shock  pressure  is 
equal  to  p1. CTH was  modified  to  capture  both 
  While  downstream  shock 
pressure  capturing  has  proved  robust  there  are 
the  upstream  shock 
pressure in the vicinity of boundaries and material 
interfaces  where  artificial  viscosity  causes  the 
material  to  experience  only  a  single  shock when 
reflection  occurs.    These  difficulties  have  been 
overcome  only  for  the  special  cases  illustrated 
heat the solid phase and finally the model must 
still  be  calibrated  using  the  Pop-plot  and  shortpulse data as before leaving no calibration constant 
available to match the degree of desensitization to 
History Variable Reactive Burn
HVRB  is  formulated  somewhat  differently 
than  other  models.    A  history  variable   is 
defined as a function of pressure
where pr DQGo are scaling constants that represent 
only  one  independent  calibration  parameter.    The 
reaction  progress  variable  is  then  related  to  the 
This  model  has  only  five  calibration  constants.  
The  parameters  np and  pr are  closely  associated 
with the Pop plot slope and intercept respectively 
while  pi controls  the  minimum  pressure  for 
reaction  and  usually  has 
parameters  n and  n describe 
topology  hole- andor  grain-burning. A  more
detailed description of this is provided in an earlier 
HVRB has been extended in two phases. The 
first phase addressed short-pulse response and the 
second  phase  addressed  desensitization.
modifications are an outgrowth of prior work13 and 
include several additional  features.  The extended
model was implemented in CTH and is referred to 
Figure 2. Pressure history for a material particle loaded 
by two shock waves showing upstream and 
downstream shock pressures.
Phase I Separating the Hot-Spot Density from the
Surface Regression Rate in HVRB
Once the  downstream shock  pressure 
known  HVRB  can  be  modified  to  separate the
shock-pressure  dependent hot-spot  density from 
the pressure  dependent
accomplish  this  the  history  variable  is  expressed 
where ps is the shock pressure and pi is a threshold 
pressure  for  hot-spot  formation.    The  first  factor 
accounts  for  the  hot-spot  density  and  the  second 
convenience the hot-spot function is defined as
and the regression function is
unchanged and  a  single  calibration  constant  has 
While  this  formulation  does  not  account  for 
the extinguishment of hot spots nothing precludes 
adding this feature in the future. This extension is 
expected  to  allow  the  use  of  a  lower  pressure 
exponent  and  better  capture  the  response  to  short 
pulses.    For  example  nb  1  can  be  used  with 
ns  np - nb to  preserve  the  order  of  the  original 
HVRB pressure dependence.
library  Hugoniot  and  HVRB 
calibration  for PBX-9404 were  found 
inaccurate.    After  correcting  this  XHVRB  Popplot  calibrations  were  obtained  using  burnexponent nb values of 0.0 0.5 1.0 and 2.0. The 
calibrations  matched  the  experimental  Pop  plot 
slope to within 1 and the intercept to within 2.
Simulations  were  then  performed  for  comparison 
with  reported  results  in  thin-flyer  and  projectile 
impact experiments.   Results  were obtained  using 
HVRB and each of the four XHVRB calibrations.
Phase I Results for Thin Flyer Simulations
Figure 3 summarizes results of simulations of 
the thin flyer experiments performed by Weingart 
et al.   HVRB with corrected Pop plot calibration
predicts  critical  flyer  velocities  that  are  too  high 
and  rapidly  diverge  from  the  experimental  results 
as  the  flyer  thickness  decreases.    Results  are 
improved  using  XHVRB  but  no  close  match  to 
both the slope and intercept was obtained.
Figure 3. Critical velocities for thin-flyer impact initiation 
of PBX-9404 with HVRB and four XHVRB 
calibrations compared with experiments.  
Equations for power law fits for each case are 
Phase I Results for Projectile Impact Simulations
reported  critical  velocities  as 
functions  of  projectile  diameter  for  PBX-9404 
using  flat  and  blunt hemispherical projectiles 
with  and  without  tantalum  covers.    When  the 
covers are sufficiently thin flat projectiles load the 
explosive  with  pressure  waves  that  are  sustained 
for a longer period and decay more slowly than the 
waves  produced  by  blunt  projectiles andor  thick 
covers.    These  experiments  were  simulated  using 
the  corrected HVRB  calibration  and two  of  the
experimental  results  are  represented  by solid
colored bands in Figure 4 bare targets are on the 
bottom and the targets with the thickest covers are 
on  the  top.    Critical velocity  predictions  with 
HVRB are accurate for flat projectiles except for 
thick  covers  and  small-diameter  projectiles  but 
are much too  high  for  blunt  projectiles.    The 
Figure 4. Critical velocities for projectile impact initiation 
of PBX-9404 compared with experiment.
results are dramatically improved using XHVRB.
Phase II Pseudo-Entropy
The  following  expression  for  pseudo-entropy 
generated by a shock wave is introduced
where  ps  psd - psu
is  the  increase  in  shock 
desensitization  exponent  a  new  calibration 
parameter.  The cumulative pseudo-entropy is then 
The hot-spot factor in the history variable kernel is 
replaced  with  a  form  depending  on  pseudoentropy
For the first shock psu p0 and qsucvo  p0pr so that
Thus for the first shock the extended model with 
desensitization  is identical  to  the  extended  model 
without desensitization.
A  two-layered  MylarIron  impactor  produces 
a  two-step  shock  in  an inert explosive  sample.   
Figure 5 shows the two shock pressures produced 
as  functions  of  impact  velocity  as  well  as  the 
pseudo-entropy for the first shock bottom curve
a single shock to the pressure of the second shock
top  curve  and  for  the second  shock.    For  small 
values  of  nd  the  pseudo-entropy  of  the  second 
shock  is  close  to  that  for  the  single  shock  to  the 
pressure of the second shock.  As nd increases the 
pseudo-entropy  of  the  second  shock  approaches 
that of the first shock.  Also shown in Figure 5 is a 
comparison  of  the  entropies  produced  by  the  two 
shocks with the pseudo-entropies. The entropy is 
calculated from the expression
This is consistent with the Mie-Grneisen equation 
of state as implemented in CTH.
In  order  to  demonstrate  the  effects  of  the 
extended model simulation results obtained using 
an  XHVRB  calibration 
for  Composition A3 
Type II  have  been  compared  with  those obtained 
three  classes  of  problem 
involving  shock  desensitization  double  shock 
loading reflected shock loading and the effect of 
an  opposed  non-initiating  shock  on  a  propagating 
Figure 5. Behavior of pseudo-entropy including effects of 
parameter variations and entropy for a doubly 
Phase II Double Shock Loading
In  the  case  of  the  impact  of  a  layered-flyer 
producing  a  two-step  shock  wave  HVRB  with 
no  desensitization  predicts  that  the  second  shock 
to  detonation  before 
overtaking the  first even though the  first  shock is 
expected  to  desensitize the  explosive  prior  to  the 
arrival of the second shock.  XHVRB with nd  0.1
more  accurately  represents  the  expectation  that 
transition  will  be  delayed  until  after  the  shocks 
coalesce. Specifically a flyer consisting of 2-mm
of  Mylar  followed  by  2-mm  of  iron  at  800  ms 
produces a 1.6 GPa shock followed by a 3.9 GPa 
shock in Composition A3 Type II.  These coalesce 
to  a  5.4  GPa  shock  that  runs  to  detonation  under 
the influence of a rarefaction in a little over 4 mm. 
These results are illustrated in Figure 6.
Phase II Shock Reflection
When  a  non-initiating  shock  reflects  from  a 
high-impedance  interface  its  pressure  increases 
In the examples shown in Figure 7
incident  shock  strength  of  2.1  GPa  and  reflected 
shock  strength  of  5.9  GPa HVRB  predicts  that 
the reflected shock will transition to detonation in 
spite  of  the  fact  that  it  is  propagating  into 
desensitized  material. This  problem  plagued  our 
sympathetic  detonation  simulations. 15
XHVRB nd 0.2 transition of the reflected shock 
does not occur. It is important to note that special 
treatment  of  the  reflection  region  was  required  to 
capture the proper upstream shock pressure.
Phase II Opposing Waves
When a propagating detonation encounters an 
opposing non-initiating shock HVRB predicts that 
the  detonation  will  continue 
Campbell and Travis16 observed extinguishment of 
a  propagating  detonation  under  similar
multidimensional circumstances. Using XHVRB 
with  a  sufficiently  high  value  of  nd causes  the 
propagating  detonation 
to  be  extinguished.  
Figure 8 shows  XHVRB  results  with  nd  0.1  and 
Similar  results  were  achieved  with 
entropy-dependent CREST model.17
Figure 6.  Comparison of HVRB and XVRB predictions of response to double shock loading for nd  0.1.
Figure 7.   Comparison of HVRB and XVRB predictions of response to shock reflection for nd  0.2.
Figure 8.  XHVRB causes a detonation propagating from the left to extinguish when encountering a
desensitizing opposing shock for nd  0.4 bottom while propagation continues for nd  0.1 top.
As  demonstrated  by  the  foregoing  examples 
the  extended  version  of  HVRB  provides  a 
capability  for  improved  modeling  under  shortpulse  and  multiple-shock 
loading  conditions.
This  was  achieved  by  explicitly  representing  the 
hot  spot  density  as  a  function  of  pseudo-entropy 
in  turn  a  function  of  shock  pressure  and  the 
surface regression as a  function of local pressure.
The  hot-spot  paradigm  is  closely  followed  and 
only two calibration parameters have been added.
The  author  would  like  to  thank  Drs.  Scott 
Kukuck and Linhbao Tran for their early efforts in 
establishing the shock detection algorithm in CTH.
The  research  presented  in  this  paper was 
performed in accordance with contracts W911QX09-C-0057 and W911QX-14-C-0016 with the U.S. 
Army Research  Laboratory.  The  views  and 
conclusions  contained  in  this presentation  are 
those of the author and should not be interpreted as
presenting  the  official  policies  or  position  either 
expressed  or  implied of  the  U.S.  Army  Research 
Laboratory  or  the  U.S.  Government  unless  so
designated  by  other  documents. 
for Government  purposes 
notwithstanding any copyright notation hereon.
Detonation Kinetics Modeling of Liquid Explosives via Reactive Flow 
ALE3DCheetah Simulations  
I-Feng W. Kuo Sorin Bastea and Laurence E. Fried 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94550 
Materials Science Division 
Abstract The detonability of an oxygen balanced hydrogen peroxide HP and isopropyl 
alcohol  IPA  mixture  is  investigated  with  ALE3DCheetah  simulations  using  reaction 
mechanisms and kinetics parameters derived from experiments and simulations. We find 
that only slight adjustments to the kinetics parameters obtained from Quantum Molecular 
Dynamics  QMD  simulations  are  needed  to  reproduce  existing  experimental  data  for 
pure HP. In the case of the HPIPA mixture similar changes to the kinetic prefactors can 
shift  the  predicted  failure  diameter  from  greater  than  1  inch  to  less  than  0.25  inch.  It 
appears that predicting the failure diameter for liquid explosives based on unimolecular 
kinetics mechanism is feasible with few assumptions particularly if some experimental 
data are also available. 
Advances  in  experimental  techniques  as  well 
simulation  algorithms  have  enabled  an 
unprecedented look at complex chemical reactions 
at  high  pressures  and  temperatures  on  length  and 
time  scales  of  angstroms  and  femtoseconds 
respectively.  Thus  directly  probing  fast  chemical 
reactions either experimentally or computationally 
at  conditions  typically  encountered  in  detonation 
physics is now feasible. The standard paradigm in 
detonation  physics  based  on  Chapman-Jouguet 
theory  CJ  which  relies  on  the  assumptions  of 
instantaneous  chemical 
reactions  planar  and 
infinitely  thin  shock  fronts.  This  theory  has  been 
employed  with  great  success  for  many  ideal 
explosives. For non-ideal explosives or explosives 
with  charge  diameter  near  critical 
dimensions  this  assumption  breaks  down  under 
hydrodynamics  and  reaction  rates  starts  to  play  a 
in  determining  detonation 
Here  we  present  a  new  bottom-up  approach 
where by utilizing basic information gleamed from 
fundamental  simulations  andor  experiments  e.g. 
chemical  reaction  rates  it  is  possible  to  predict 
various  detonation  properties.  In  particular  we 
employ  simplified  reaction  kinetics  coupled  with 
an accurate equation of state code Cheetah linked 
to a scalable hydrodynamic code ALE3D.2-4 We 
expect that this approach should be able to predict 
detonation properties for both ideal and non-ideal 
explosives ranging from large charge diameters all 
dimensions.  To  test  out  this  new  paradigm  we 
have  chosen  as  test  materials  hydrogen  peroxide 
HP and isopropyl alcohol IPA due to the wealth 
of  available  data  as  well  as  recently  performed 
experiments and simulations.5 
Table 1 Arrhenius kinetics parameter. 
Technique MSST algorithm7 were performed to
determine  decomposition  rates  using  molecular 
lifetime analysis assuming Arrhenius kinetics 
k  A T B expHr  RT         1 
The energetic barriers HrR as well as kinetics 
prefactor A can be obtained in principle directly 
from  simulations  by  analyzing  the  time  evolution 
of species concentrations. In Fig 2 the molecular 
concentration  for  HP  water  and  oxygen  are 
plotted over time for the case of HP shocked close 
to detonation conditions.5 In particular we assume
2 O2              2 
To  summarize  the  experimental  and  ab  initio 
simulation  derived  kinetics  parameters  for  liquid 
HP  used  in  this  study  are  shown  in  Table  1.  The 
thermal  combustion  mechanism  of  IPA  is  still 
mechanisms. To keep the simulation tractable the 
following  decomposition  based  on  Arrhenius 
kinetics for IPA was assumed. 
2 O2 3CO2  4H2O       3 
The Arrhenius kinetics parameters utilized for IPA 
were  derived  from  first  principles  prediction  by 
Bui  et  al.  extrapolated  to  high  pressure  limit.8
Unlike HP the IPA kinetic parameter contains an 
additional  dimensionless  temperature  dependent 
temperature  dependent 
prefactor was proposed by Bui et al. to help model 
observed  temperature  dependence  decomposition 
rate  of  IPA.  The  following  abbreviated  product 
efficiency  HP  IPA  H2O  CO2  CO  O  and  H2. 
Fig. 1 Schematic diagram of the 2 dimensional 
ALE3DCheetah simulations set-up to model a 
confined  cylinder  test.  Dimensions  are  shown 
All  simulations  were  performed  using  the 
hydrodynamics  code  ALE3D  coupled 
code  Cheetah.2-4  Chemical
kinetics  as  well  as  equation  of  state  properties 
were  handled  explicitly  by  Cheetah.  The 
simulations  modeled  copper  cylinder  tests  and 
assumed  2D  symmetry  a  schematic  diagram  is 
shown  in  Fig.  1.  Using  recent  experiments  and 
simulations5 new equations of state for unreacted
HP  were  developed  based  on  exp6-polar 
consistent  treatment  of  mixtures  of  reactants  and 
products at high pressures and temperatures which 
is  essential  for  reactive-flow  modeling.  For  HP 
density  functional  based  tight  binding  DFTB 
calculations  coupled  to  the  Multi-Scale  Shock 
interactions.6  They  enable 
5.9 kms 2.18 gcc 1887 K 17.4 GPa
y  0.0677  exp-0.271x
Fig. 2 Concentration of HP and its products water 
and  oxygen  as  analyzed  for  a  density  functional 
tight  binding  MSST  simulation.  The 
concentration  of  HP  blue  water  red  and 
oxygen green are shown as it evolves through the 
MSST simulation. In particular the concentration 
of HP can be fitted black line in order to obtain 
necessary Arrhenius parameter. 
Table 2 Detonability and detonation velocity 
kms of HP60IPA mixtures. 
diameters  of  1.0  0.5  and  0.25  inch.  With  no 
adjustment to the IPA kinetics parameters all three 
simulations failed to detonate with failure defined 
as  the  lack  of  a  self-propagating  shock  wave.  An 
example  can  be  seen  in  Fig  3.  Thus  with  no 
parameters  the  predicted  failure  diameter  will  be 
greater than 1 inch. 
the  sensitivity  of 
to  reaction  kinetics  we  varied 
Arrhenius  prefactor  A  for  the  IPA  combustion 
reaction only. The prefactor was adjusted up to 10 
times higher than the results predicted by Bui et al. 
and  simulations  were  performed  at  3  different 
cylinder  diameters  and  4  different  prefactor  A 
values. The results are summarized in Table 2. The 
failure diameter varies from larger than 1 inch for 
the  slowest  rate  as  experimentally  observed  for 
concentrated peroxide to smaller than  inch for 
fastest  one.  The  detonation  velocity 
dependence  on  charge  size  is  rather  small.  The 
limited  single  mixture 
experimental  data  on  detonation  failure  can  be 
used  to  tune  the  IPA  high  pressure  combustion 
kinetics  and  therefore  enable  predictions  for  any 
concentrations.  Additional 
simulations  can  also  potentially  be  employed  to 
further refine the reaction mechanism even in the 
absence  of  experiments.  These  modeling  avenues 
will be exploited in the near future.  
IPA  were  performed  using 
Reactive  flow  simulations  of  confined  liquid 
ALE3DCheetah  aggregate  code.  HP  and  IPA 
were  assumed  to  degrade  unimolecularly  with 
associated  Arrhenius 
prefactors  and  energetic  barriers  were  initially 
determined via fundamental atomistic simulations. 
The  concentrations  of  HP  IPA  and  O2  were 
We  started  our  reactive-flow  study  by  first 
performing  a  series  of  simulations  with  varying 
convergence  properties.  Mesh  sizes  ranging  from 
80  to  640  zones  per  centimeter  were  evaluated. 
The predicted change in detonation velocity going 
from  80  to  160  zones  per  centimeter  for  a 
hypothetical 2 inch charge diameter HPIPA mix is 
0.004 kms. The predicted failure diameter appears 
invariant between 80 and 160 zones per centimeter 
for  the  kinetics  parameters  utilized  in  Table  1. 
Factoring in computational cost and feasibility the 
choice  of  utilizing  80  zones  per  centimeter  was 
made for the rest of the simulations.  
Utilizing  the  kinetics  parameters  shown  in 
Table 1 a series of simulations was performed to 
determine  the  detonation  velocity  dependence  on 
charge size for HP. The detonation velocity for HP 
was determined to be 6.44 kms for an unconfined 
1.0 inch diameter charge and the CJ pressure was 
found  to  be  14.7  GPa  both  in  agreement  with 
standard  CJ  calculations.  Using  the  same  kinetic 
parameters  the  failure  diameter  was  estimated  to 
be  less  than  0.25  inches  and  thus  much  smaller 
than  experimental  observations  for  HP  under 
heavy  confinement.9  To  resolve  this  discrepancy 
we decided to adjust the kinetic prefactor to match 
the  experiments  since  atomistic  simulations  are 
generally  more  robust  in  predicting  energetic 
barriers  of  chemical  reactions  than  the  Arrhenius 
kinetic  prefactor.  By  reducing  the  prefactor  i.e. 
slowing  down  the  decomposition  kinetics  by  a 
factor  of  20  we  were  able  to  obtain  a  failure 
diameter  in  the  range  of  12  inch  in  agreement 
with experiments.9 No adjustment was made to the 
IPA  kinetics  parameter  prior 
the  critical  failure  diameter  of 
The transferability of the equation of state and 
chemical kinetics models for the pure components 
HP and IPA to mixtures was tested. To this end 
reactive  flow  simulations  containing  an  oxygenbalanced mixture of HP with 40 water content 
to  IPA  were  carried  out  with  varying  charge 
3. Fried  L.  E.  Howard  W.  M.  Souers  P.  C.  In
Proc. 12th Int. Det. Symp. 2002. 
4. Bastea S. Fried L. E. In Shock Wave Science
and Technology Reference Library Zhang F. Ed. 
Springer 2012 Vol. 6. 
5. Armstrong  M.  R.  Zaug  J.  M.  Goldman  N.
Kuo I. F. W. Crowhurst J. C. Howard W. M. 
Carter  J.  A.  Kashgarian  M.  Chesser  J.  M. 
Barbee T. W. Bastea S. J. Phys. Chem. A 2013 
6. Bastea S. Fried L. E. J Chem Phys 2008 128.
7. Reed  E.  J.  Fried  L.  E.  Joannopoulos  J.  D.
Phys Rev Lett 2003 90. 
8. Bui  B.  H.  Zhu  R.  S.  Lin  M.  C.  J.  Chem.
Phys. 2002 117 11188. 
9. Engelke  R.  Sheffield  S.  A.  Davis  L.  L.  J.
Phys. Chem. A 2000 104 6894. 
John  Bdzil  LANL  How  well  did 
fundamental global kinetics law Arrhenius do 
at predicting the failure diameter of H2O2 confined 
in  SS304  wall  tubes?  The  failure  diameter  and 
diameter effect were carefully measured as a part 
of  the  LANL  fundamental  research  in  explosives 
I-Feng  W.  Kuo  From  current 
simulations the model predicts a failure diameter 
between 1 and 2 inches 25.4 to 50.8 mm at 300 
K  for  a  9010  H2O2H2O  mixture.  In  comparison 
Engelke et al. experimentally measured the failure 
diameter  for  a  90.59.5  H2O2H2O  mixture  to  be 
43.2  2.2 mm at 29.8  0.8 C.  
John  Bdzil  LANL  For  your  H2O2  detonation 
simulations  did  you  see  any 
detonation  instability?  For  the  propagating  2D 
detonation  in  the  cylinder  test  geometry  did  you 
see transverse waves? 
Reply by I-Feng W. Kuo The instantaneous shock 
velocity  was  used  to  categorize  either  detonation 
in  each  simulation.  The 
or  failure  occurred 
mechanism  of  detonation 
instability  was  not 
investigated. We did not see transverse waves it is 
likely  that  higher  resolution  simulations  and  a 
more  detailed  analysis  of  the  results  is  needed  to 
Fig.  3  Pressure  profile  HPIPA  mixture  after  10 
us  with  white  as  region  of  highest  pressure.  In 
these  images  white  preprenets  a  pressure  of  15 
GPa.  Material  boundaries  are  drawn  in  red  and 
green. Steady state detonation occurred top with 
kinetic  prefactor  of    2.4  x  1024  while  the  use  of 
8.0  x  1023  causes  the  initial  shock  to  dissipate 
As expected the Arrhenius prefactors needed to be 
adjusted  to  yield  agreement  with  experimentally 
measured failure diameters as atomistic simulation 
collisional probability for small unit cells. With the 
adjusted prefactors A an oxygen balanced HP60 
liquid mixture of HP and IPA shows the influence 
reaction  kinetics  have  on  determining  failure 
diameter.  In  the  range  of  diameters  considered 
constant.  Future  refinements  of  the  chemical 
kinetics  based  on  MD  simulations  may  further 
increase  the  confidence  of  such  predictions  for 
liquid  energetic  mixtures  and  possibly  even  for 
solid formulations.  
the  detonation  velocity 
This work was performed under the auspices of the 
U.S.  Department  of  Energy  by  Lawrence 
Livermore  National  Laboratory  under  Contract Development of a Grain-Scale Model for Shock Initiation of HNS 
David L. Damm1 Ryan R. Wixom2 and Cole D. Yarrington2  
1.  Schlumberger Technology Corporation Houston TX USA  
2. Sandia National Laboratories Albuquerque NM USA 
Abstract.  The  shock  initiation  of  energetic  materials  is  governed  by  the  release  of 
chemical energy at hotspots which are created by localization of the shock wave energy at 
discontinuities or defects in the material.  We have conducted numerical simulations of 
the  shock-to-detonation  transition  in  porous  beds  of  granular  hexanitrostilbene  HNS 
using realistic microstructures a first-principles equation of state and local temperaturedependent homogeneous reaction kinetics.  The model geometry consists of a solid matrix 
of  crystalline  HNS  with  discrete  cylindrical  pores  or  voids  whose  size  distribution  and 
placement  is  statistically  equivalent  to  the  observed  microstructure  in  cross-sectioned 
samples  of  HNS.    The  equation  of  state  for  the  solid  phase  was  derived  from  density 
functional  theory  molecular  dynamics  DFT-MD  calculations  of  the  Hugoniot  for 
crystalline HNS.  In typical simulations the bed is impacted by a thin flying plate which 
drives a shock wave into the material.  The shock wave compresses the solid and crushes 
the voids thus creating localized regions whose temperature and pressure exceed the bulk 
average.  In addition the release of chemical energy at these hotspots creates a reactive 
flow field which is highly non-uniform in both pressure and temperature.  The flow field 
either builds up to detonation conditions or is quenched by release waves depending on 
the magnitude of the impact shock duration of the impact shock porosity of the bed and 
pore  size  distribution  within  the  bed.    The  temperature  predictions  for  the  solid  phase 
have  been  improved  by  implementing  a  temperature-dependent  specific  heat  and  by 
accounting  for  heat  generation  due  to  plastic  work  or  yielding  of  the  material.    The 
dependence  of  the  local  temperature  fields  on  initial  void  geometry  has  also  been 
analyzed.  These results are aiding in the development of grain-scale simulations which 
strike a balance between accuracy and computational expense. 
Continuum  reactive  burn  models  are  widely 
used in hydrocodes for numerical simulation of the 
shock-to-detonation  transition  in  heterogeneous 
energetic  materials.    Properly  calibrated  burn 
models  provide  satisfactory  performance  in  many 
applications  provided 
approximation is valid for the problem at hand.  In 
some cases this approximation becomes poor.  For 
size  of  volume  elements  within 
example  if  the  duration  of  the  incident  shock 
pulse  is  very  short  relative  to  the  size  of 
microstructural  features 
approximation may give poor results. Similarly if 
computational  mesh  are  approaching  the  length 
scale  of  microstructural 
computational domain is not truly a continuum.     
In  heterogeneous  materials  the  initiation  of 
chemical  reactions  is  believed  to  occur  at  defects 
the  shock  energy  and  create 
such  as  voids  cracks  grain  boundaries  or  any 
other  discontinuity  where  local  temperature  and 
pressure can  far exceed the bulk average.   Grainscale  or  so-called  mesoscale  models  have 
provided  insight  into  how  these  heterogeneities 
conditions  which  are  favorable  for  the  onset  of 
reactions. Throughout the years models of varying 
complexity  have  been  developed  ranging  from 
simple geometries such as single spherical voids12 
to  highly  detailed  geometries  including  large 
ensembles  of  neat3  or  plastic-bonded4    explosive 
grains.    Those  simulations  have  typically  been 
limited  to  unit  cells  or  representative  volume 
elements  which capture the statistical behavior of 
the shock response of the bed but are inadequate 
to  directly  simulate  the  complete  transition  to 
Numerical  simulations  of 
detonation  have  significant  practical  application.  
For example the results of grain-scale simulations 
could be used to calibrate continuum burn models 
by explicitly accounting for heterogeneities in the 
sample.  At  present  continuum  burn  models  are 
samplesthus  the  parameters  are  not  sample 
independent.    The  same  explosive  pressed  to  a 
different  density  or  from  a  different  batch  of 
powder  likely  requires  a  new  set  of  calibration 
experiments  and  a  different  set  of  reactive  burn 
model  parameters.  Thus  there  is  motivation  to 
develop  and  validate  grain-scale  models  which 
the  microstructure  of 
Here we present the recent development5 of a 
grain-scale  model  which 
simulated  the growth to detonation or failure of 
in  pressed  beds  of  granular 
hexanitrostilbene HNS using homogeneous local 
reaction  kinetics  and  discrete  microstructures.  
After  a  brief  review  of  this  modeling  framework 
and  simulation  results  we  discuss  refinement  of 
the  model including the implementation of a  new 
tabular  EOS  for  unreacted  HNS  the  role  of 
material  strength  during  void  collapse  and  the 
effects  of  void  shape  and  orientation  on  hot  spot 
The  2D  model  geometry  consists  of  a  solid 
matrix of pure HNS with discrete circular pores or 
voids  whose  size  distribution 
equivalent  to the  void size distribution  which  has 
been  measured  in  cross-sectioned  samples  of 
compacted  HNS  powder6.    Fig.  1  shows  an 
example of a binarized micrograph of a real crosssection  and  an  equivalent  simulated  cross-section 
which  forms  the  basis  of  the  model  geometry. 
Each  void  in  the  SEM  image  was  fit  by  an 
equivalent  circular  void.  The  void  diameter 
distributions  for  various  samples  were  fit  by  lognormal  curves  with  the  mean  ranging  from  136254 nm.   
Fig.  1.  Binarized  image  of  pellet  cross-section 
top  and  simulated  microstructure  with  circular 
While the resolution of the SEM is quite high 
several  nm  the  resolution  of  the  micrograph 
shown in Fig. 1 is only 24.4 nmpixel 25000 nm 
field  of  width  recorded  onto  1024  pixels.  
Considering  the  image  resolution  and  practical 
limitations  for  computational  mesh  resolution 
voids  less  than  20  nm  in  diameter  were  not 
microstructure  from  the  functional  form  of  the 
measured distribution. It is interesting to note that 
the size of the unit cell for a molecule of HNS is 
approximately  1  nma  limit  below  which  the 
material is clearly not a continuum. 
The equation of state for the solid phase was 
derived  from  density  functional  theory  molecular 
dynamics DFT-MD calculations of the Hugoniot 
for  crystalline  HNS7.    The  DFT-MD  predictions 
were fit by a second order polynomial 
cid3cid1847cid3046 cid3404 cid884cid484cid889cid887cid887 cid3397 cid883cid484cid890cid889cid883cid1873cid3043 cid3398 cid882cid484cid883cid883cid887cid884cid1873cid3043
Where  Us  is  the  shock  velocity  and  up  is  the 
material  velocity  kms.    Although  additional 
calculations are underway points on the Hugoniot 
have only been calculated up to a pressure of 33.8 
GPa so caution is recommended if using Eq. 1 at 
higher  pressures.  The  calculated  Hugoniot  of 
crystal-density  HNS  was  implemented  in  CTH 
using the Mie-Gruneisen analytical option. 
The  porous  bed  was  impacted  at  the  lower 
horizontal  boundary  by  a  plate  traveling  at  a 
velocity  of  several  kms.    Periodic  boundary 
conditions were applied to the vertical boundaries.  
The top horizontal boundary was treated as a semiinfinite medium. At high impact velocitiesthose 
required for detonationthe impact stress exceeds 
the  yield  stress  of  the  material  by  an  order  of 
magnitude  or  more.    Therefore  strength  of  the 
calculations.    This  assumption  was  subsequently 
relaxed and the results are discussed below. 
The rate of conversion of HNS to its reaction 
cid1856cid2019 cid1856cid1872cid932 cid3404 cid4666cid883 cid3398 cid2019cid4667cid1827cid1857cid1876cid1868cid4670cid3398cid1831cid3028 cid1846cid932 cid4671 
where    is  the  extent  of  reaction  Ea  is  the 
activation energy T is the temperature of the solid 
and A is a constant.  The activation energy is based 
on data for thermal decomposition of HNS8.  For 
the state of the reaction products a sesame table of 
thermochemical  equilibrium 
calculations9 was used here. 
were carried out in the shock-physics code CTH.  
The porous bed is impacted by a thin plastic flyer 
with initial velocity of several kms which drives 
a shock  wave into the  material see Fig. 2.  The 
shock  wave compresses the solid and crushes the 
localized  regions  whose 
temperature  and  pressure  far  exceed  the  bulk 
average.  When the rate of chemical energy release 
is  greater  than  the  dissipation  of  energy  due  to 
rarefaction  waves  andor  thermal  diffusion  the 
shock strength increases until steady detonation is 
achieved.    Below  this  threshold  the  shock  wave 
weakens and fails to form into a steady detonation.      
Fig. 2. Hydrocode simulations of plate impact into a porous bed of HNS.  The shock front is traveling in the 
y  direction  with  periodic  boundary  conditions  at  x0  and  x8.    The  colormaps  show  pressure 
temperature and extent-of-reaction profiles left to right 1.75 ns after impact. 
growsuntil  the  release  wave  from  the  rear 
surface  of  the  flyer  arrives  and  relieves  the 
pressure.    The  average  pressure  starts  to  fall  and 
the flow field never reaches detonation conditions.  
At 3200 ms the impact shock is slightly stronger 
and  the  release  wave  is  not  able  to  overtake  the 
shock front.  The average shock strength builds up 
gradually then rapidly transitions to detonation at a 
depth of approximately 100 m. 
phenomenon  of  shock  waves  in  a  porous  bed 
which  either  successfully  run-up  to  detonation  or 
fail  to  detonatedepending  on  the  initial  shock 
strength porosity and pore-size distribution.   Fig. 
2  shows  a  sample  of  pressure  temperature  and 
extent-of-reaction  profiles  within 
matrix 1.75 nanoseconds after impact.  The shock 
wave  has  traveled  approximately  7  m  into  the 
noticeable  evidence  of  hotspot  formation  and 
growth.  Fig.  3  illustrates  local  pressures  along  a 
line  placed  1  micron  deep  within  the  porous  bed 
above  the  impact  interface.  The  bulk  average 
pressure  at  impact  is  approximately  10  GPa  but 
local pressure variations exceeding 13 GPa and as 
low  as  5  GPa  are  also  observed.  After  a  few 
nanoseconds  the  pressure  drops  rapidly  as  the 
release  wave  from  the  rear  surface  of  the  flyer 
arrives at the impact interface. 
Fig.  3.  Local  pressure  variations  1  m  above  the 
impact  surface  1ns  left  and  5ns  right  after 
The average pressure at various depths within 
the  material  is  shown  in  Fig.  4.    The  preexponential factor in the reaction rate Eq. 2 was 
adjusted  such  that  the  predicted  threshold  flyer 
velocity  for  successful  run-up 
matches  the  experimentally  measured  velocity 
3200  ms.        At  3100  ms  the  shock  wave 
initiates  noticeable  reactions  and  momentarily 
Fig.  4.  Average  pressure  at  depths  of  1  5  10 
2090  microns.    The  upper image  shows  failure 
to detonate following flyer impact at 3100 ms.  In 
the  lower  image  the  shock  wave  transitions  to 
detonation after flyer impact of 3200 ms. 
The  simulation  results  exhibit  features  which 
are  typical  of  shock  initiation  in  heterogeneous 
explosiveseven  though  the  reaction  rate  in  this 
  The  heterogeneous 
behavior is a consequence of discontinuities in the 
microstructure  which  were  explicitly  modeled 
here.  The relationship between void size and run 
distance  to  detonation  was  investigated  with  the 
simulation.  As  the  void  size  increases  the  run 
distance also increases because the voids are fewer 
and further apart to maintain a constant density. 
However it may be more appropriate to correlate 
the shift to longer run distances to the increase in 
the  interface  area  which  is  defined  as  the  total 
perimeter  of  voids  per  unit  area  of  the  image  in 
2d. This relationship is shown in Fig. 5.     
Fig. 5. Run distance to detonation for samples with 
varying  interfacial  surface  area  3200  ms  impact 
Of course the interface area and circular void 
diameter are very simply related for uncomplicated 
geometrical shapes but in real materials this isnt 
the case. Khasainov et al.10 compiled experimental 
evidence  of  this  relationship  for  a  variety  of 
explosives showing clear linear trends of changing 
critical  diameter  and  run  distance  with  increasing 
interface  area  of  both  void  and  solid  particle 
A  major  source  of  error  in  the  predicted 
temperature  fields  and  reaction  rates 
assumption  of  constant  specific  heat.    In  order  to 
improve  the  accuracy  of  the  model  we  have 
equation of state which includes a non-constant or 
temperature-dependent specific heat11. 
Fig.  6  compares  the  predicted  temperature 
fields during collapse of a 100 nm void using the 
constant  specific  heat  EOS  and  the  new  sesame 
table  with  temperature-dependent  specific  heat.  
The  initial  shock  pressure  is  6  GPa  and  reactions 
are not included in this simulation.  The predicted 
bulk average temperatures behind the shock wave 
are  507  and  443  K  for  the  constant  and  variable 
specific  heat  cases  respectively.    The  maximum 
temperatures  in  the  solid  phase  near  the  crushed 
void  are  1803  and  1163  K  for  the  constant  and 
variable  specific  heat  cases  respectively.      This 
significant  discrepancy  in  predicted  temperatures 
is  amplified  in  the  reaction  rate  due  to  its 
exponential dependence on temperature. 
Fig.  6.  Temperature  of  the  solid  HNS  after  pore 
collapse  for  the  case  of  constant  specific  heat 
right  and  temperature-dependent  specific  heat 
left.  The temperature scale is 300 to 1500 K. 
The  mechanical  strength  of  the  material  also 
has  a  significant  effect  on  the  temperature  of  the 
solid  during  deformation.    To  investigate  these 
effects  we  applied  the  elastic-perfectly  plastic 
model  with  various  yield  strengths  ranging  from 
100-1000 MPa.  The addition of material strength 
has  two  effects.    First  the  leading  surface  of  the 
void  does  not  form  a  jet  and  collapses  with  a 
reduced  velocity  as  the  yield  strength  increases 
see  Fig.  7.  Second  the  temperature  of  the  solid 
increases due to plastic deformation in addition to 
the  temperature  increase  caused  by  adiabatic 
compression.    These  effects  start  to  become 
visibly  noticeable  for  yield  strengths  of  100  MPa 
and greater.  This is somewhat surprising because 
the impact stress in these simulations was 6 GPa a 
factor of 60 times greater than the minimum yield 
the  results  agree  with 
previous  works  by  Menikoff2  and  Khasainov12 
who  included  viscous  effects  in  their  calculations 
and  showed  that  temperature  of  the  solid  during 
void  collapse  has  a  strong  dependence  on  the 
viscosity.  Menikoff 
hydrodynamic  void  collapse  was  an  insufficient 
mechanism to generate the temperatures necessary 
for hotspot ignition on the timescale necessary for 
shock initiation of HMX. 
Fig.  7.  Circular  void  partially  compressed  by  a  6 
GPa shock wave.  The compressive yield strength 
for  the  elastic-plastic  model  is  indicated  in  each 
frame.    The  simulation  time  is  the  same  for  each 
frame.    The  color  indicates  temperature  which 
ranges  from  443  K  behind 
shockwave  to  a  maximum  of  765  K  in  the  lower 
right frame in the region of void closure. 
The peak temperatures after void crushing are 
also  heavily  dependent  on  yield  strength.    Fig.  8 
shows the maximum temperature of the solid as a 
function  of  elastic-plastic  yield  strength.    The 
hydrodynamic  case  is  represented  by  zero  yield 
moderately  up  to  500  MPa  with  a  dramatic 
increase  observed  at  higher  yield  strengths.  The 
dynamic compressive strength of crystalline HNS 
is not known however it is likely to be in the same 
range  as  other  explosives  for  example  100-300 
MPa12.    In  this  range  peak  temperatures  fall 
between  1030  and  1200  Ka  relatively  small 
window  given  the  many  assumptions  of  the 
present  analysis  and  large  uncertainty  in  material 
Shock Temperature no void
Fig. 8. Peak temperature of the solid during shock 
wave compression and void crushing.  Zero yield 
stress represents the case of purely hydrodynamic 
The  shape  of  the  void  also  influences  the 
temperature of the hotspot.  Tarver13 assumed the 
existence  of  spherical  cylindrical  and  flat  plate 
slab  hotspots  and  used  a  one-dimensional 
thermal  diffusion  model 
temperature-dependent  reaction  rate  to  calculate 
the critical temperature for ignition.  As expected 
the initial temperature required for hotspot ignition 
was greatest for the spherical hotspot followed by 
cylindrical  then  slab  geometries.    The  trend  is 
surroundings  for  the  three  shapes  considered.  
the  rate  of  heat 
Here  we  have  specified  an  initial  void  shape 
based on observations of voids in cross-sectioned 
material  samples  and  calculated  the  shape  and 
temperature  of  the  resulting  hotspot.  The  initial 
shape of the void plays a significant role in the size 
of the heated region and the temperature increase 
that is generated.   
front  were  considered. 
Oblong  voids oriented parallel and normal to 
simulations  used  the  tabular  EOS  for  solid  HNS 
with material strength of 250 MPa.  The paralleloriented  void  is  analogous  to  the  concept  of  a 
slab  hotspot  however  the  temperature  fields  in 
the vicinity of the crushed void are highly irregular 
and  non-planar  see  Fig.  9.    A  small  intensely 
heated  region  is  created  at  the  vertical  mid-plane 
of  the  void  due  to  convergence  of  jets  from  the 
edges.    Oblong  voids  which  are  normal  to  the 
shock front also create  hotspots  with complicated 
  Both  configurations  of  oblong  void 
temperature  fields  which 
different  from each other and very different  from 
those  in  Fig.  6.    The  temperature  fields  do  not 
appear to follow an intuitive pattern and bear little 
resemblance to the initial void geometry.  
Real  voids  have  a  much  more  complicated 
geometry  than  the  simplified  cases  considered 
above.    Fig.  10  is  an  image  of  a  cross-sectioned 
sample  of  pressed  HNS  illustrating  the  wide 
variety of shapes and sizes of voids which can be 
expected.    One  of  these  voids  was  extracted  for 
simulation  and  the  results  are  shown  in  Fig.  11.  
Again  the  hotspot  is  rather  unique  looking 
nothing  like  the  original  void  geometry  from 
which  it  was  formed.    We  suspect  that  various 
orientations of this void with respect to the shock 
front will also yield varying results.     
Fig. 10. Image of ion-polished HNS showing pore 
structure. The red square indicates the void which 
was extracted for the simulation. 
Fig. 11. Simulation of a void with actual geometry 
temperature scale is 300 to 1500 K. 
It is not practical to consider all possible pore 
geometries  and  orientations  thus  it  is  imperative 
Fig.  9.  Oblong  voids  oriented  parallel  top  and 
otherworldly temperature fields shown 98 ps after 
impact  bear  almost  no  resemblance  to  the  initial 
to  identify  statistically  equivalent  approximations 
and  treat  the  microstructure  in  a  probabilistic 
manner similar to the methods employed by Baer14  
or  Barua15.    The  purpose  of  studying  individual 
identify  satisfactory 
approximations  to  the  literal  microstructure  such 
that  statistically  equivalent  microstructures  will 
yield physically equivalent results.  Similarly the 
best  available  physical  models  can  be  applied  to 
simulations of single voids in hopes of identifying 
satisfactory  simplifying  assumptions  which  make 
simulations  of  many  voids 
computationally  feasible.  Once  this  is  achieved 
direct numerical simulations of shock initiation in 
heterogeneous  beds  may  be  carried  out  and 
parameterization of continuum models. 
Conclusions and Future Study 
We have developed a model for the shock-todetonation  transition  in  porous  beds  of  granular 
microstructures a first-principles equation of state 
and local temperature-dependent reaction kinetics. 
discontinuities in the microstructure voids which 
have  been  explicitly 
geometry.    The  model  directly  simulates  the 
deformation  and  heating  of  the  solid  matrix 
subsequent  release  of  chemical  energy  and 
progression  of  the  reactive  flow  field  to  quasisteady detonation conditions.   
temperature-dependent  specific  heat  material 
strength and pore geometry were demonstrated for 
simulations  of  individual  voids.    These  studies 
have illustrated several areas in which the accuracy 
of the model can be improved.  First the strength 
of  the  solid  material  at  the  micro-scale  under 
dynamic  loading  conditions  is  poorly  understood.  
Our  results  showed  that  even  the  inclusion  of  a 
simple  elastic-perfectly  plastic  model  with 
relatively  low  yield  strength  can  significantly 
affect the predicted temperature of the solid.  This 
in turn directly affects the rate of chemical energy 
release.    Refinement  of  the  strength  models  is 
critical  for  achieving  accurate  predictions  of 
The  second  area  for  improvement  is  the 
reaction  mechanisms  which 
thermodynamic conditions to the rate of chemical 
  The  kinetics  may  be  more 
complicated than the single-step Arrhenius kinetic 
rate  that  was  assumed  here.    We  are  currently 
investigating the shock-induced chemistry in HNS 
and  other  materials  and  plan  to  incorporate  those 
results into this model as they become available. 
A third topic for investigation is the validity of 
the continuum hydrocode at the sub-micron length 
scale.    Large-scale  reactive  molecular  dynamics 
simulations  are  approaching  this  length  scale1617 
and  may  eventually  overlap  the  lower  end  of  the 
continuum  models  using 
molecular dynamics techniques would represent a 
major step forward in energetic materials research. 
Despite  these  areas  for  improvements  the 
modeling approach presented here is a useful tool 
for  studying  the  role  of  microstructure  on  the 
initiation behavior of heterogeneous explosives.   
This  work  was  supported  in  part  by  the 
Laboratory  Directed  Research  and  Development 
program  and  the  Advanced  Scientific  Computing 
program  at  Sandia  Labs. 
managed  and  operated  by  Sandia  Corporation  a 
wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  Lockheed  Martin 
Corporation for the U.S.  Department of Energys 
National  Nuclear  Security  Administration  under 
contract DE-AC04-94AL85000. 
is  a  multi-program Nitrogen Oxides as a Chemistry Trap in Detonating Oxygen-Rich Materials
Nir Goldman and Sorin Bastea
Physical and Life Sciences Directorate Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Abstract. Despite decades of research the chemical processes and states of matter that
govern the behavior of energetic materials under detonation conditions are not well understood including the molecular level processes that determine decomposition kinetics
and energy release. Oxygen content is often employed as a simple and intuitive guide
to the development and practical use of explosives but its effect on detonation chemistry
remains little studied especially for the case of oxygen overabundance. To this end we
have conducted quantum molecular dynamics QMD simulations of zero oxygen balance
and oxygen-rich mixtures of hydrogen peroxide and nitromethane under detonation-like
conditions to near equilibrium time-scales. We nd excellent agreement between our extrapolated chemical equilibrium properties and those from thermochemical models for the
zero oxygen balance mixture. In contrast for the oxygen-rich mixture we observe the formation of nitrogen oxide intermediates particularly nitrate ions NO3 that effectively act
as an oxygennitrogen trap by precluding the formation of the equilibrium products N2
and CO2. Our results could have implications for the design and modeling of oxygen-rich
energetics in common military and industrial use.
Explosive materials generally contain both oxidizing oxygen-rich and reducing oxygen-poor
groups which under the high pressure and temperature conditions typical of a detonation shock wave
produce small gaseous products with low heats of
1. Deformation such as H2O N2 CO and CO2
spite their extensive production and practical use
for numerous industrial and military applications2
the basic microscopic properties for many energetic
materials during shock-induced chemical decomposition are not well known. Detonation wave reaction times i.e. steady-state reaction zones lengths
are inferred from hydrodynamic measurements to
be anywhere between nanosecond to microsecond
time scales3. However the molecular level processes that govern the extent of the reaction zone
are poorly understood for many organic materials and composites with longer time scale kinetics e.g. larger than a few nanoseconds frequently
thought to result in carbon-rich oxygen-poor explosives from processes such as carbon condensation
and coagulation4 possibly coupled with slow CO2
The oxygen balance degree to which an explosive can be oxidized is known to correlate well with
both performance5 and sensitivity properties6 and
therefore it is an important metric for the synthesis of new energetic compounds7 8. A convenient
avenue for controlling oxygen balance in energetic
mixtures is to combine oxygen-rich and oxygenpoor materials as done for example in the widely
used ammonium nitrate-fuel oil ANFO formula
930
tion 9. These types of mixtures have widespread
use in mining and civil construction due to their low
cost and relative insensitivity. However oxygenrich mixtures tend to exhibit long reaction zones
which result in large failure diameters i.e. the minimum charge diameter at which propagation of a
steady detonation is possible10 and poor performance. The development and use of high performance oxidizers and their mixtures remain of much
interest for a variety of applications including civil
engineering rocket propellants and munitions11
which would directly benet from a fundamental
understanding of their chemical reactivity at extreme conditions such as those encountered during
Molecular dynamics MD simulations provide
an independent route to chemical speciation that occurs during detonation-like conditions which could
facilitate future design and use of energetic materials. Accurate modeling of the breaking and formation of chemical bonds behind a shock front frequently requires the use of a quantum theory12 13
such as density functional tight binding14 DFTB.
DFTB with self-consistent atomic charges SCC
is an approximate quantum simulation technique
that allows for several orders of magnitude increase
in computational efciency while retaining most of
the accuracy of standard quantum simulations e.g.
Kohn-Sham Density Functional Theory DFT15.
This allows DFTB simulations to achieve close to
equilibrium timescales for long-timescale reactivity e.g. several hundred picoseconds or greater13
whereas DFT-MD calculations are generally limited
to tens of picoseconds16 and can be far from equilibrium under similar conditions12. DFTB has been
shown to provide accurate descriptions of chemical
reactivity for a number of systems under extreme
conditions including nitromethane17 and other organic materials18 19. Recently DFTB was used to
validate both the equation of state and decomposition kinetics of hydrogen peroxide H2O2  under detonation conditions from picosecond timeresolved shock compression experiments20.
In this work we predict an entirely new mechanism for the slow chemical reactivity of nitrogencontaining oxygen-balanced to oxygen-rich explosive mixtures under detonation conditions using the
DFTB quantum simulation method. We focus on
liquid explosives and choose hydrogen peroxide
and nitromethane as prototypical energetic materials with an excess and decit of oxygen respectively. Our simulations consisted of 6040 molar
ratio zero oxygen balance and 8020 molar ratio positive oxygen balance mixtures of hydrogen
peroxidenitromethane under detonation-like conditions. Zero oxygen balance corresponds to a mixture with exactly enough oxygen to turn all carbon
into CO2 and all hydrogen into H2O positive oxygen balance corresponds to a system with a surfeit of oxygen 5.. We rst validate our results
for the thermodynamic properties of each mixture
against results from equation of state EOS chemical equilibrium models21. We then analyze the
long timescale chemical reactivity of both mixtures
and nd that the rate of formation of the end products CO2 and especially N2 is determined in part
by the slow kinetics from nitrogen oxide intermediates. This leads to the striking result in the oxygenrich mixture that nitrate NO3 acts as a major nitrogen and oxygen trap leading to a very long-lived
likely metastable thermodynamic state. Our results
can help elucidate the properties of these types of
materials under extreme conditions including the
reaction zones and could be useful in guiding their
Computational Methods
Direct chemical equilibrium calculations were
performed for these mixtures using the methodology outlined in Ref.21. In these calculations the individual molecular products are modeled by exp6polar interactions parameterized by a wide range of
experimental data e.g. static and dynamic pressure
experiments sound speed measurements and the
system thermodynamics is derived using statistical
mechanics techniques. This approach has proved
to be successful for predicting the properties of a
variety of reactive materials at high pressures and
temperatures including shock Hugoniots and detonation velocities22.
DFTB-SCC calculations were driven by the
LAMMPS molecular software simulation suite23
with the DFTB code24 used to compute forces and
the cell stress tensor. We used C-H-O-N interaction
parameters available for download mio-0-1 parameter set from httpwww.dftb.org. The maximum
number of SCC steps for each MD time step was
reduced to four through use of the Extended Lagrangian Born-Oppenheimer molecular dynamics
XL-BOMD approach for propagation of the electronic degrees of freedom25. Thermal populations
of excited electronic states are computed through
the Mermin functional26. All simulations discussed
here were performed with a time-step of 0.2 fs
which allowed for the simulation conserved quantities to maintain a constant value. The zero oxygen
balance mixture was set up with 36 H2O2 and 24
CH3NO2 molecules 312 atoms total. Zero pressure optimization produced computational-cell lattice vectors of a  23.9961  b  11.9980 
and c  11.9980  yielding an initial density of
1.29 gcm3 compared to the EOS computed value
of 1.26 . The positive oxygen balance mixture contained 72 H2O2 and 12 CH3NO2 molecules 276
atoms. This was optimized to lattice vectors of
a  22.7646  b  11.3823  and c  11.3823
 yielding an initial density of 1.33 gcm3 the
same as the EOS computed value. Each initial mixture was equilibrated at 300 K for 10 ps using NoseHoover thermostat chains27 28. Uniaxial compression due to the shock wave occurred along the a
lattice vector. Previous work has shown that doubling the system size along the a lattice vector for
a similar system and size yielded virtually identical
thermodynamic conditions under shock loading12.
Shock compression simulations were conducted
using the well-established Multi-scale Shock compression Simulation Technique MSST29. MSST
operates by time-evolving equations of motion for
the atoms and the computational cell dimension in
the direction of the shock to constrain the stress in
the propagation direction to the Rayleigh line and
the energy of the system to the Hugoniot energy
condition. For a given shock speed these two relations describe a steady planar shock wave within
continuum theory. MSST has been used in conjunction with quantum simulation methods to accurately
reproduce the shock Hugoniot of a number of systems e.g. Ref.20. For all shock velocities we used
a scaling term with the MSST ionic equations of
motion to account for drift in the conserved quantity in our simulations13. A scaling factor of 104
resulted in a deviation in the total forces in our simulations of less than 1 once a steady shock com
pression had been produced. Simulations were run
for up to 40 ps excluding those near detonation conditions which were allowed to evolve for up to 250
ps within the shock state. The deviation from the
Hugoniot energy and Rayleigh line conditions for
all of our shock compression simulations was less
Results and Discussion
For both mixtures we simulated shock velocities
between 3  10 kms spanning pressures of 4  70
GPa and compressions of 1.43  2.13 times the initial density. The Hugoniot temperatures of the zero
oxygen balance mixture spanned 450  5670 K and
the positive oxygen balance mixture from 440 
5790 K. For simulations that were overdriven the
system achieved a reactive state within 5 ps of compression. Comparison of our computed pressure vs.
density Hugoniot results show good agreement with
EOS calculations Fig. 1. We observe excellent
agreement for systems of pure peroxide for both the
unreacted and reacted Hugoniot curves in part due
to the rapid chemical equilibrium of H2O2 under
shock loading20. The agreement for the zero and
positive oxygen balance mixtures is reasonable for
the unreacted Hugoniot though somewhat worse
for the reacted curve. This is likely due primarily
to the slow reactivity of the system where chemical
equilibrium and the concurrent expansion have not
been achieved on the timescales of our simulations.
Chemical equilibrium calculations 21 yield detonation velocities of 6.93 kms for the zero oxygen balance mixture and 6.75 kms for the positive oxygen
balance mixtures. Here we analyze the equation of
state and ensuing chemistry of both mixtures at 7
kms. Slightly overdriven conditions avoid any possible instability in the MSST method below detonation conditions30 and allow for faster chemical reactivity that is more readily modeled on the timescales
of the present simulations.
We determine the specic chemical
reactivity in our simulations using a pre-established
methodology of optimal bond cutoff distances and
lifetimes13. The optimal value for rc to distinguish between bonded and nonbonded atomic sites
is given by the rst minimum in the corresponding
pair radial distribution function gR which corresponds to the maximum of the potential of mean
Fig. 1. Pressure vs.
relative volume Hugoniot
curves for pure H2O2 black positive oxygen
balance red and zero oxygen balance mixtures
blue. The dashed and solid lines corresponds to
EOS results for the unreacted and reacted Hugoniot
respectively and the open and closed circles to the
same from DFTB. DFTB simulations of the positive
and zero oxygen balance mixtures are slow to reach
equilibrium on the time scales of our simulations.
force viz. W R  kBT lngR where kB is
the Boltzmann constant and T is the system temperature.
In addition in order to avoid counting
species that were entirely transient and not chemically bonded we also chose a lifetime cutoff c of
20 femtoseconds for C-H O-H and N-H bonds and
50 femtoseconds for all others N.B. no H-H bonds
were detected in any of our simulations. This criteria is intuitive since bonds with this lifetime could
conceivably be detected spectroscopically. As a result atom pairs were considered to be bonded only
if they resided within a distance of each other of rc
for a time of greater than c. The concentrations
of species at high pressure and temperature have
some dependence on bond and lifetime criteria as
expected and has been shown for other hot dense
materials12. We found that the overall conclusions
of this work were independent of these parameters.
Fig. 2. Pressure density and temperature time
traces for the zero oxygen balanced mixture during shock compression at close to detonation conditions. The time coordinate is shifted so that t  0
corresponds to the onset of shock compression and
results are averaged over 5 ps windows.
Time traces of the equation of state properties
of the zero oxygen balance mixture indicate that
the system has not yet achieved thermodynamic
equilibrium though chemistry-induced expansion
is observable on the timescales of the simulations
Fig. 2. The sudden increase in temperature and
pressure due to shock loading leads to the synthesis of a number of detonation products including
H2O N2 CO2 CO Fig. 3. We also observe signicant amounts of the nitrogen oxide compounds
NO nitric oxide NO2 nitrogen dioxide and the
nitrate ion NO3 i.e. dissociated nitric acid HNO3.
Nitrogen oxides are commonly formed during combustion of nitrogen-containing fuels31. We nd that
the concentrations of NO molecules are approximately 5-6 times those of NO3 and NO2 respectively throughout the course of this simulation. The
decomposition of H2O2 occurs according to the
expected mechanism of 2H2O2  2H2O  O2
with H2O subsequently reacting with the methyl
group in CH3NO2 to form formic acid HCOOH
604020P GPa0.800.700.600.50VV0604020P GPa0.800.700.600.50VV0604020P GPa0.700.600.50VV027.527.026.526.025.5P GPa200150100500time ps2.262.242.222.202.182.16 gcc200150100500time ps3500340033003200T K200150100500time psand carbonic acid H2CO3 intermediates. CO and
CO2 are then produced through elimination of a water molecule from each intermediate respectively.
H2O has been shown to catalyze the formation of
C-O bonded compounds in carbon-rich explosives
under detonation conditions32. We also observe
that after shock compression approximately 11
of the number of reactions yielding CO2 as a product occur through oxidation of CO which may be
the main mechanism for evolution of CO towards
its chemical equilibrium concentration.
Fig. 3. Time traces for the zero oxygen balance
mixture of the major chemical species compared to
EOS results gure legend. Results labeled NO
from our MD simulations correspond to concentrations of NO NO2 and NO3 summed together.
Due to its short molecular lifetimes results labeled
H2O from our MD simulations correspond to H2O
and OH concentrations summed together. All concentration time traces have non-zero slopes indicating that the system is progressing to chemical equilibrium over the time scale of our simulation.
Molecular nitrogen synthesis occurs through the
following four step sequence 1 reduction of NO2
from nitromethane by a hydrogen ion from dissociated water NO2  H  NO  OH 2 dimerization of NO molecules NO  NO  NO2 3
reduction of the NO dimer hyponitrite by an additional hydrogen ion NO2  H  N2O  OH
4 elimination of an oxygen ion from an N2O
molecule N2O  N2  O. For this system the
relatively high NO concentration is a key aspect
NO2 has been observed in
low temperature gas phase33 and condensed phase
studies34 and is known to lead to N2 formation via
an N2O intermediate in catalytic systems35. In this
case the need for a catalyst is obviated by the extreme pressures and temperatures and the presence
of reducing agents such as CO and hydrogen ions.
For both carbon and nitrogen oxide formation water from the peroxide decomposition is observed to
play a crucial role either as catalyst or intermediate reactant. Lifetimes of the majority products Table 1 indicate that N2 14 ps CO 2 ps and N2O
2 ps have relatively long lifetimes compared to
the hundreds of fs values for all other listed species.
We note that short lifetimes are due in part to eeting interactions with H and OH from dissociated
water which results in the formation of many transient species e.g. HCO2 with computed lifetimes
of hundreds of femtoseconds and below.
Table 1. Average lifetimes of chemical products for
the zero oxygen balance mixture.
Compound Lifetime ps
Given the short chemical lifetimes and complex
reactivity in our simulations we have generalized
chemical events by examining the time traces of
concentrations of specic bond types Fig. 4. This
allows for a detailed chemical picture under these
conditions without relying on the fate of specic
compounds and any intermediates they might form.
We observe that concentrations of O-X XC N
O H and N-N bonds all appear to be approaching equilibrium on the timescales of our simulations. In order to estimate their equilibrium values
we rst shift the time origin to the onset of shock
6543210Concentration moleskg200150100500time ps24222018EOS Results H2O 26.7 CO2 8.4 N2 4.2 CO 0.5 NO 0.5 O2 0.0lated value for the O-N equilibrium concentration is
somewhat higher than the EOS value in part due to
the fact that our simulations predict some amount
of NO2 and NO3 whereas the chemical equilibrium calculation nds NO as the main nitrogen oxide molecule. Charged products like NO3 are also
traditionally not included in chemical equilibrium
calculations although such modeling may be within
Table 2. Equilibrium concentrations of different
bond types chemical products for the zero oxygen
balance mixture. Concentrations are shown in units
of moleskg. DFTB results are extrapolated by tting to exponential functional forms.
In contrast equation of state results for the oxygen rich mixture indicate much less variation after shock compression Fig. 5. The pressure density and temperature time traces all appear to oscillate about a mean value rather than indicating
a chemistry-induced expansion. We observe H2O
CO2 CO O2 and nitrogen oxides as detonation
products all of which appear to be in a quasisteady chemical state Fig. 6.
NO3 ion is the dominant nitrogen oxide product
by far with a concentration that is approximately
three times that of both NO and NO2. The concentrations of H2O nitrogen oxides and CO2 all
vary only slightly over the timescale of this simulation and the quasi-steady values for CO2 and
nitrogen oxide compounds are all somewhat lower
than the EOS model predictions.
observe only trace amounts of O2 and zero N2
production in contrast to the values of 5.5 and
1.7 moleskg respectively predicted by the chemical equilibrium calculation. This seemingly slow
equilibrium chemistry relative to the zero oxygen
balance mixture is surprising given the enhanced
chemical reactivity where the average lifetimes pre
935
Fig. 4. Time traces for the zero oxygen balance mixture of O-H bonds e.g. H2O O-C bonds e.g. CO
CO2 O-N bonds e.g NO NO2 and NO3 O-O
bonds e.g. O2 and N-N bonds e.g. N2. O-O
bonds disappear after 15 ps whereas O-H O-C
O-N and N-N bonds all exhibit slow chemistry over
compression where the temperature becomes relatively constant and t each time trace to a simple
exponential form. Specically the time-dependent
bond concentrations Ct of O-C O-H and N-N
bonds were t to a function of the form Ct 
A11ektA2 with the equilibrium values estimated by A1  A2 and the O-N bond concentration
trace was t to Ct  A1ekt  A2 with the estimated equilibrium value equal to A2. This type
of analysis provides a straightforward method for
making comparisons to chemical equilibrium calculations. The resulting time constants k1 range
from 20 ps for O-C bonds to 300 ps for O-H
bonds. This implies that chemical equilibrium for
this system is achieved over timescales of hundreds
of picoseconds to nanoseconds. We nd that our
computed equilibrium concentrations of O-X and
N-N bonds agree well with those determined from
the EOS equilibrium chemistry Table 2. In particular we see close agreement for O-C O-O OH and N-N bond concentrations which provides
good validation for the equilibrium chemistry predicted by the mio-0-1 parameter set under these
extreme thermodynamic conditions. The extrapo
151050Concentration moleskg200150100500time ps5045403530 O-C bonds O-H bonds O-N bonds O-O bonds N-N bondsFig. 5. Pressure density and temperature time
traces for the positive oxygen balanced mixture during shock compression at close to detonation conditions. The time coordinate is shifted so that t  0
corresponds to the onset of shock compression and
properties are averaged over 5 ps windows.
dicted for the major detonation products are all under 500 fs Table 3.
In particular we note that
the computed lifetime for H2O is roughly half the
value of the result from the zero oxygen balance
mixture and that of CO is approximately one order of magnitude smaller. This is in part due to
the higher mole fraction of H2O2 starting material
which yields higher concentrations of H and OH
ions due to water dissociation which in turn promotes reactivity with other chemical species e.g.
Analysis of the reaction mechanisms in the shock
compressed mixture indicate that CO and CO2 also
largely form through the elimination of water from
formic and carbonic acids. Similar to the zero
oxygen balance mixture approximately 12 of the
number of CO2 forming reactions occur though oxidation of CO molecules. The nitrogen oxide chemistry is dominated by the direct oxidation of nitric
oxide and NO2 to NO3 as well as protonationdeprotonation reactions involving NO3HNO3. In part
Fig. 6. Time traces for the positive oxygen balance
mixture of the major chemical species compared to
EOS results gure legend. Similar to 2 results
labeled NO correspond to concentrations of NO
NO2 and NO3 summed together and those labeled
H2O to concentrations of H2O and OH summed
Table 3. Average lifetimes of chemical products for
the positive oxygen balance mixture. N2 molecules
were not detected on the time scales of our simulations.
Compound Lifetime ps
due to both steric hindrance and its overall charge
the NO3 ions have increased difculty in dimerizing. This in effect traps some of the supply of both
the nitrogen and oxygen atoms into a metastable
product directly inhibiting the formation of N2 and
the release of oxygen to form O2 and CO2. We
observe some NO32 formation in our simulation
though the product is short-lived  60 fs and its
formation is almost entirely balanced by its dissoci
936
27.827.627.427.227.026.8P GPa200150100500time ps2.292.282.272.26 gcc200150100500time ps3720368036403600T K200150100500time ps43210Concentration moleskg200150100500time ps242220181614EOS Results H2O 27.9 O2 5.5 CO2 5.1 N2 1.7 NO 1.6 CO 0.0dance of nitrate ion NO3 intermediate which inhibits nitrogen oxide dimer formation and subsequent N2 release. As a result NO3 ion formation
effectively leads to the trapping of the system in
a likely metastable zero N2 production state that
slows down further chemical energy release. This
is in sharp contrast to the decomposition mechanism of negative oxygen balance energetic materials e.g. PETN and TATB where N-O chemistry
equilibrates extremely rapidly and carbon condensationcoagulation and carbon-oxygen bond chemistry are the rate limiting steps to achieving chemical equilibrium32. These results could have signicant implications for oxygen-rich energetics where
the detonation chemistry time scales could be larger
than usually assumed and slow nitrogen oxide kinetics could be a signicant factor in the poor performance of these materials37 38. Further work is
underway to fully characterize the N-O chemistry
under these conditions for possible use in continuum scale reactive-ow models.Characterisation of Reaction Waves in the Initiation of Detonation
Jerey Salmond and Nikos Nikiforakis
Laboratory for Scientic Computing
University of Cambridge UK
Abstract. The ignition of condensed-phase explosives is investigated by simulating the reection
of a shock through nitromethane. The passage of the shock leads to the formation of a reaction wave.
Of particular interest is the evolution of the reaction wave from when it emerges to when it eventually
overtakes the precursor shock. We identify locate and characterise transient quasi-steady phenomena
in the unsteady ow prior to the formation of a steady detonation wave. Results indicate that the
reaction wave is composed of transient quasi-steady waves similar to the ones observed in the gaseous
case albeit in a more complex combination.
In this work we identify locate and characterise
reaction waves in the shock-induced ignition of the
condensed-phase explosive nitromethane. We simulate an impact problem with the reection of a precursor shock wave from a solid boundary in a semiinnite one-dimensional domain lled with explosive.
Characterising and locating reaction waves in this idealised problem is an important rst step to studying
other ignition conditions including hotspots.
The passage of a precursor shock through a combustible material may lead to the emergence of a reaction wave. Of particular interest is the evolution of
the reaction wave from its emergence to when it eventually overtakes the precursor shock. This evolution
is inuenced by the strength of the precursor shock
wave and the sensitivity of the explosive.
It has been observed see for example Meniko
2009 James  Lambourn 2006 that the reaction
wave in condensed-phase explosives may evolve to
form a dome-like structure before overtaking the precursor shock wave and forming a detonation wave.
Meniko 2009 postulated that the dome-like structure is characteristic of heterogeneous explosives such
as PBXs. In contrast a thermal runaway process leading to a detonation is characteristic of homogeneous
explosives such as liquid nitromethane 13. While
the sequence of events and the shape of the evolving
waves has been discussed based on pressure p x and
density   x spatial distributions and particle velocity
histories the nature of the evolving combustion-driven
When a steady detonation wave has emerged and
is mapped onto p v pressure versus specic volume space it is easy to identify the steady-state structure by means of the CJ values and the von Neumann
peak. However when the ow eld is transient and
the waves have compound structure an analysis based
on spatial distribution has limitations. The emerging waves are characterised in the literature by terms
such as superdetonation which are useful but are
nevertheless incompatible with the standard textbook
terminology of fundamental combustion waves based
on the steady p v diagram. Given the inherently
transient nature of the evolving ow a p v space
mapping as in the steady detonation case is not immediately obvious.
It is thus useful to revisit previous work by Clarke
and co-workers in the context of the evolution of
gaseous detonations. The seminal work by Clarke
1989 established a theoretical foundation for the
identication of transient quasi-steady phenomena
including weak detonations and fast ames which appear as straight lines of negative slope on p v space.
Singh and Clarke 1992 considered shockinduced ignition of a combustible gaseous mixture
using a p v space analysis to reveal that the evolving
reaction wave was in fact composed of these quasisteady waves which propagated in space as compound
waves. Later Nikiforakis and Clarke 1996 tracked
these waves in two-dimensional space in the context
of hotspot ignition in a gaseous mixture. This work
illustrated that events that happen on the scale of bulk
reaction can be found in the same form on the microscale of resolved hotspots.
More recently Bates 2005 tracked these quasisteady waves on xt space and showed they can still
be identied if the simple Arrhenius-based reaction
rate law is replaced by a detailed chemistry model.
This detailed chemistry model was also applied to a
hydrogen-oxygen mixture at dierent levels of dilution by argon.
Some authors investigating condensed-phase explosives mapped their results onto p v space. For
example Sharpe  Short 2004 presented simulations of a solid explosive modelled with the ideal gas
equation of state and Handley 2010 performed simulations of HMX based PBXs with realistic equations
of state and heterogeneous structure. In both of these
works the evolution of the ow was plotted on p v
space. However the analysis did not go as far as
tracking quasi-steady waves.
It is the purpose of this work to apply the methodology described above to condensed-phase explosives
and to identify transient quasi-steady waves similar
to the ones identied in the gaseous case. Although
the characterisation of the evolving reaction waves is
an interesting study in its own right it is even more
important to apply the same methodology to resolved
simulations of hotspot ignition as in the work by Nikiforakis  Clarke 1996. Understanding the reaction
generated ow due to hotspots by characterising the
transient waves emanating in their vicinity and their
propagation into the bulk of the explosive is key to the
development of mesoscale models for shock initiation
of heterogeneous explosives. The future development
of these mesoscale models is the motivation for this
We consider liquid nitromethane as the working
material as it has been extensively studied by analytical numerical and experimental means so there is a
wealth of data for validation purposes. Once its ignition behaviour is assessed as a neat substance its
heterogeneous state can be studied by articially seeding it with impurities such as gas cavities and solid
In the following sections we present the governing equations of ow and the necessary closure conditions as well as a brief overview of the numerical
methodology used to calculate their solution. The
model is validated for steady-state detonation and
shock-induced ignition against analytical experimental and previously published numerical results. Finally
we present early and late stages of the evolving ow
on p v space and the complete wave structures on
xt space. Results indicate that the reaction wave
emerging following the passage of a precursor shock
is composed of transient quasi-steady waves similar
to the ones observed in the gaseous case albeit in a
more complex combination.
In this work we model the nitromethane system
using the one-dimensional Euler equations augmented
by an additional equation to evolve the mass fraction
of the reactant. The two phases reactant and product
are described by two distinct equations of state in MieGrneisen form. The rate of reaction is modelled by a
single-step Arrhenius expression.
In one space dimension the system can be ex
pressed in conservation form as
where the vector of conserved quantities Q the ux
function FQ and the source term SQ are given by
cid42cid46cid46cid46cid46cid46cid44
cid43cid47cid47cid47cid47cid47cid45  FQ 
cid42cid46cid46cid46cid46cid46cid44
cid43cid47cid47cid47cid47cid47cid45  SQ 
cid42cid46cid46cid46cid46cid46cid44
cid43cid47cid47cid47cid47cid47cid45 .
The following notation is used density  specic
volume v velocity u pressure p total energy E mass
fraction  and the rate law to be dened later as K .
The total energy E is dened as the sum of internal
and kinetic energies where e is the specic internal
energy of the mixture. The mixture equation of state
e  ev p  is calculated from two distinct equations
of state for the reactant and product. Both component
equations of state are in the generic Mie-Grneisen
where v and the reference curves prefv and erefv
The temperature of each material is calculated by
where T0 is a reference temperature and the heat capacity cv of the material is assumed to be constant. In
the context of this work this assumption reproduces
experimental and theoretical values.
Mixture Equation of State
The mixture equation of state is dened by the
two equations of state for the reactant and product
denoted with subscripts r and p respectively.
For this study er is a linear Grneisen equation and
ep is a pseudo-polytropic equation.
The mixture specic volume v is dened as a
weighted sum of the two phase volumes vr and vp with
the specic internal energy e as a similar weighted
sum of the two specic internal energies er and ep
To close the system assumptions must be made
about the mixture. In this work we make the commonly used assumption that the phases are in mechanical equilibrium that is equal velocities u  ur  up
and pressures p  pr  pp. Furthermore we assume
that the two phases are in temperature equilibrium
The assumptions of mechanical and temperature
equilibrium have been examined by a variety of authors including 2 9 and 17 who have concluded
that for most cases mechanical equilibrium occurs on
very short timescales and non-equilibrium eects can
be safely neglected. The evidence for temperature
equilibrium is less well established but in practice it
gives reasonable results Stewart 22 has found that
very similar solutions for the structure of the detonation wave can be obtained with either temperature
equilibrium or thermal isolation.
To evaluate the mixture equation of state we follow 22 and dene an auxiliary parameter  as the
ratio of the phase specic volumes   vr vp. This
gives the partial volumes as
Therefore  can be found as the solution of
This is solved using a numerical root nding technique.
Reactant Equation of State Linear Grneisen
We use the linear Grneisen equation of state for
the unreacted liquid nitromethane. This equation of
state assumes that there is a linear relationship between the shock and particle velocities
Product Equation of State Pseudo-Polytropic
We take a pseudo-polytropic equation of state for
the gaseous products of the reactions and we choose to
dene the tting parameter  as a rational polynomial
The Mie-Grneisen reference curves are dened as
prefv  0 and erefv  e0 and the values of the
parameters are given in table 2. The values of these
parameters were determined by tting the expected
v p and adiabatic gamma at the CJ state from 3
along with the expected detonation velocity and heat
Table 2 Parameters for product equation of state.
Figure 1 Shock us and particle up velocity loci for
liquid nitromethane. Experimental points are taken
from 7 10 11 and 12. The line is calculated
from the linear Grneisen equation of state with parameters from table 1.
where a and b are constants. The reference curves are
derived from the us  up relationship and are dened
and v  0. The parameters used in this work are
tted to experimental data in 7 10 11 and 12.
The experimental us up points and the t are plotted
in gure 1. The values are given in table 1.
For this work we use a rst-order Arrhenius type
reaction rate of the form
Table 1 Parameters for the reactant equation of state.
Other studies have used more complex rate expressions for example Meniko 14 suggests a secondorder Arrhenius law and Tarver 23 suggests a
pressure-based ignition and growth formulation. For
the set of experiments conducted in this work we
have found that the simple rst-order rate law gives
reasonable results. This is illustrated in the validation
A range of studies see for example 14 18
and 23 have found that values for the activation
 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2us kmsup kmsMarshHardestyLysneenergy around E  12.5  103 K give reasonable results.
In this work this value was varied slightly to E 
11.5  103 K with A  2.6  109 s1 in order to achieve
a good match with experimental Pop plot data.
The nal system of partial dierential equations
is solved by means of operator-splitting. The hyperbolic part is integrated by the weighted average ux
WAF method 24 which is a second-order accurate
Godunov-type nite volume method. The ordinary
dierential equation for the reactive source term is
solved using a second-order Runge-Kutta scheme.
The simulations were performed with a constant
cell size of 250 nm.
The validity of this model is assessed in the rst
instance by calculating the form of a steady state detonation. The Hugoniot locus and overdriven detonation
locus or Crussard curve are shown in gures 2 and 3
and the von Neumann and Chapman-Jouget states are
marked on each plot. The Hugoniot loci calculated
from this material model demonstrate a good t to
the experimental data points. Figure 3 also includes a
curve calculated from the theoretical work in 26 and
again good agreement is shown.
The pressure specic volume and temperature at
the key points on these plots are given in table 3 and
these values are within the spread of values found
in the literature see 14 and 15 and references
Table 3 Initial VN and CJ states for a steady detonation wave at 6.25  103 m s1.
We can also assess the suitability of the model
Figure 2 Nitromethane Hugoniot locus lower curve
and overdriven detonation locus upper curve. The
von Neumann and Chapman-Jouget states are marked
VN and CJ and are joined by a Rayleigh Line. Also
shown are experimental points from Marsh 12 Hardesty 7 Lysne 11 and Leal-Crouzet 10.
Figure 3 Nitromethane temperatures along the Hugoniot locus for reactants lower curve and products
upper curve shown as a function of pressure. Also
shown are experimental points from 7 and a curve
dashed line calculated from the theoretical work
 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8pressure GPaspecific volume m3kg 10-3MarshHardestyLysneLeal-Crouzet 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 0 51015202530temperature Kpressure GPaVNCJFigure 4 Time to ignition as a function of input shock
pressure. The line shows results from ve numerical
simulations using the material model described and
points are from experiments in Campbell 4 Hardesty 7 Leal-Crouziet 10 Voskoboinikov 25 and
Sheeld adapted from 14.
for shock initiation by comparing to experimental Pop
plot data. Figure 4 shows experimental and simulation
results for the time to ignition at dierent shock input
pressures. There is a large scatter in the experimental
data partly due to varying experimental techniques
and denitions for ignition. A similar picture emerged
when we varied the denition of ignition as a percentage of the amount of fuel consumed. Irrespective of
the latter the simulation results were within the spread
of the experimental data but the curve shifted within
that range. For clarity those measurements are omitted and we plot the time of the extreme case when
the reaction wave is about to overtake the precursor
Finally we can assess the accuracy of the model
and the simulation code by evolving a steady travelling
detonation wave. Velocity histories from embedded
gauges are shown in gure 5.
To conrm that the simulation attains the correct
steady state the numerical solution is overlaid on the
Figure 5 Steady travelling detonation wave recorded
at gauges between 48 mm and 50 mm away from point
Figure 6 Simulation results for a steady travelling
detonation wave captured 10 s after ignition. The
simulation data points are overlaid on the Hugoniot
curves from gure 2 demonstrating that the detonation wave is in CJ state.
 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1 2 3 4 5 7 8 9 10 11 12overtake time spressure GPaCampbellHardestyLeal-CrouzetVoskoboinikovSheffield0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0 7.6 7.7 7.8 7.9 8 8.1 8.2up kmstime s 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8pressure GPaspecific volume m3kg 10-3reactant and product Hugoniots and Rayleigh line in
gure 6. At the bottom right of the plot in gure 6
the initial state is at the lower crossing of the reactant
Hugoniot and Rayleigh line. The shock compresses
the uid to the von Neumann spike at the upper crossing of the reactant Hugoniot and Rayleigh line. The
two numerical points between the initial state and the
von Neumann spike that lie close to the Hugoniot are
artefacts of the numerical method which smears the
shock over two computational cells. After the shock
compression the uid reacts and expands along the
Rayleigh line towards the CJ point. The nal simulation point is at the CJ state where the Rayleigh line is
a tangent to the product Hugoniot. Figure 6 shows that
the simulation points lie within numerical accuracy
on top of the Rayleigh line.
To investigate the shock induced ignition of nitromethane simulations designed to represent a gas
gun experiment were performed. The setup of the
experiment is represented with the explosive material
initially moving at high speed into a stationary reective domain boundary. The reective boundary
is not an exact representation of the impactor but it
is suitable to recreate the important features of the
A time sequence of pressure and reaction progress
proles is shown in gure 7. A sustained shock of
9.2 GPa moves into the material from the left hand
boundary eventually leading to a thermal runaway.
A reaction wave moves into the temperature gradient generated by the passage of the precursor shock
which steepens and eventually develops a discontinuity which nally catches up with the precursor shock.
We note that these results show qualitatively similar
features to the simulation results in 14 gure 10
including the structure of the leading wave just before
it overtakes the precursor shock.
To compare with the experimental results in 20
gure 5 we simulate embedded velocity gauges. The
rst stirrup gauge at the interface with the impactor
Shock induced ignition of liquid nitromethane with input pressure of 9.2 GPa. Proles
of pressure and mass fraction are shown at intervals
of 0.1 s after the initial impact.
is not included as the simulation does not model this
part of the experiment but the placement of the other
eight gauges matches the experimental setup. The
velocity of the uid impacting the boundary is chosen
such that the input shock pressure of 9.2 GPa is the
same as in the experiment. Results are shown in gure 8 and reasonable qualitative agreement with 20
The timescale of the ignition and formation of
the detonation wave is very similar to the experiment
with the rst pressure pulse at  0.8 s and the overtake at  1.2 s in both the experimental and simulation results. Furthermore if we take into account
the limited temporal resolution of the experimental
results and disregard the narrow spikes at the top of
the reaction wave not captured by the experimental
measurement the peak velocity of the wave is close
to the experimental value of 3 km s1.
To analyse the results the data for pressure versus position and specic volume versus position are
plotted against each other to show the evolution on
the p v plane. A Hough transform-based analysis
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4lambdaposition mm 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45pressure GPaFigure 8 Shock ignition simulation as described
in gure 7. Velocity histories are shown from eight
simulated gauges placed to match the experimental
setup in 20 gure 5. The gauges are placed from
1.5 mm to 6.75 mm separated by 0.75 mm.
Figure 9 Early stages of the shock initiation process
simulated as described in gure 7 shown at times
0.74 s 0.76 s 0.78 s 0.80 s and 0.82 s. Labels a-e
correspond to times on gure 11.
method is applied to identify the straight Rayleigh
line structures. In gures 9 and 10 the output from
the numerical simulation is shown as points and the
identied Rayleigh lines are overlaid as solid lines.
Figure 9 shows the rst stages of the ignition at times
0.74 s 0.76 s 0.78 s 0.80 s and 0.82 s before the
emergence of a second shock wave. Figure 10 shows
the later stages of the evolution at 0.84 s and 0.92 s
where the reaction wave is approaching the precursor
In these plots ow starts at point X in the state
downstream of the precursor shock and upstream of
the reaction wave. The nal state where the uid
meets the reective boundary is at the right hand edge
of the diagram at point Y.
In the early stages of the ignition shown in gure 9 we observe sets of straight lines of negative
slope on the compression increasing p and decreasing v and the expansion decreasing p and increasing
v sides of the curves. Following the arguments in
Singh and Clarke 21 and observing that the Mach
Figure 10 Late stages of the shock initiation process
as described in gure 9 shown at times 0.84 s and
0.92 s. The shock that forms inside the reaction wave
packet can be seen as the string of widely spaced
points. Labels f-h correspond to times on gure 11.
0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6up kmstime s 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 0.46 0.48 0.5 0.52 0.54 0.56 0.58 0.6pressure GPaspecific volume m3kg 10-3abcdeXY 10 15 20 25 30 35 0.4 0.42 0.44 0.46 0.48 0.5 0.52 0.54 0.56 0.58 0.6pressure GPaspecic volume m3kg 10-3fgXYnumbers are supersonic throughout the former and
subsonic at the latter these can be identied as quasisteady weak detonations and fast ames. The weak
detonation does not consume all of the fuel and so the
reaction continues in an unsteady region before the
emergence of the fast ame and eventually an inert
expansion Taylor-like wave.
At the later times shown in gure 10 the results
indicate that a second weak detonation emerges near
the head of the reaction wave. The ow between the
two weak detonations steepens to form an internal
shock wave and this quasi-steady group of four waves
continues to move through the material.
This is markedly dierent from what is observed
in gaseous ignition see 1 and 16 where the reaction wave behind the precursor shock evolves to form
a steady detonation wave. In this case we see that the
condensed material does not fully detonate behind the
precursor shock but instead forms a compound wave
similar to the triplet described in 21 composed of
two weak detonations separated by an internal shock
This compound wave propagates as a coherent
wave packet as indicated by the xt plot shown in
gure 11. The path of the weak detonations the fast
ame and the reaction shock wave are shown. The
precursor shock is located to the right of the region
shown in the plot. The fast ame forms rst growing
from a point close to the reective boundary. Both
waves move into the bulk of the material where the
second weak detonation and reaction shock emerge
The shock-induced ignition of the condensedphase explosive nitromethane was simulated with a
reected precursor shock wave travelling through the
explosive. Using a Hough transform-based analysis technique we were able to identify locate and
characterise transient quasi-steady waves in the unsteady ow between the times when the reaction wave
emerges and when it overtakes the precursor shock.
Figure 11 Location of the reaction waves during
ignition. The regions of weak detonations are marked
WD the regions of fast ame marked FF and the
shock that forms is shown with the solid line. The
times marked a-g correspond to the curves in gures 9
These quasi-steady phenomena are similar to those
observed in the gaseous case albeit in a more complex
The results presented here are based on initial
investigations. To conrm that these results do indeed
reect the physical behaviour of the material it will
be necessary to closely examine the assumptions in
the mathematical model. In particular the authors
intend to repeat this analysis with simulation results
from a model that does not depend on the temperature
equilibrium closure condition and also investigate
other equations of state and reaction rates.
To explore the implications of these results it will
be important to analyse other ignition scenarios such
as ignition by temperature gradients or hotspots. With
this understanding we plan to carry out similar analyses on other condensed phase explosives including the
development of mesoscale models for shock initiation
of heterogeneous explosives such as PBXs.
 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8time sposition mmabcdefgFFWDWDAcknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the sponsorship of
A Physics-based Hot-spot Model for Pore Collapse in HMX 
Michael J. Anderson1 Thomas L. Jackson12 Bono Wasistho1 and John Buckmaster3 
1Illinois Rocstar LLC 
Champaign IL  61820 
2Center for Compressible Multiphase Turbulence 
University of Florida Gainesville FL  32611 
3Buckmaster Research 
Abstract. When a shock  wave passes through an energetic material a detonation wave 
can  form.  One  potential  cause  of  this  transition  to  detonation  is  the  formation  of  local 
regions of high temperature or hot-spots within the explosive due to the presence of 
micron-scale voids. As the shock wave passes through the material these voids collapse 
resulting  in  a  local  increase  in  temperature  and  potentially  localized  ignition.  These 
regions of local ignition can combine to form a detonation wave that eventually overtakes 
the  original  shock.  As  such  realistic  models  of  the  formation  of  these  hot-spots  are 
pivotal to performing predictive numerical simulations of shock-to-detonation transition. 
Fully  resolving  these  hot-spots  numerically  is  computationally  prohibitive  as  the  mesh 
resolution  required  is  several  orders  of  magnitude  smaller  than  that  required  for 
macroscale or even mesoscale simulations. Instead we present a subgrid hot-spot model 
derived from numerical simulations of void collapse and hot-spot formation. The model 
provides an energy release source that is dependent on both the strength of the shock and 
the initial size of the void. The model also provides information about the time required 
for hot-spot activation induction time and the nal void size before ignition. The model 
is  implemented  in  our  mesoscale  simulation  code  RocSDT3D  which  is  used  to 
demonstrate  shock-to-detonation  transition  in  a  realistic  mesoscale  HMX  crystal  pack 
generated with our packing code Rocpack. 
There has been extensive development of burn 
models that currently use empirical or ad hoc hotspot  parameterizations  or  so-called  ignition-andgrowth approaches. Previously we have explored 
the effects of hot-spots by implementing one such 
ad  hoc  model  that  modifies  the  local  density 
according  to  the  size  of  the  hot-spot  and  its 
proximity1.  In  this  model  the  local  density  is 
modified  by  computing  the  distance  from  a  hotspot.  The  influence  that  each  hot-spot  has  on  the 
surrounding  material  is  defined  by  the  hot-spot 
extent.  We  have  used  this  model  to  explore  the 
effects of hot-spot packing density and size in both 
explosive  packs.  We  have  shown  that  this  model 
reproduces  the  trends  observed  experimentally2 
Published by the Office of Naval Research in the Proceedings of the 15th International Detonation Symposium. 
parameters  is  required  to  match  the  transition 
the  following  sections  we  present  a 
rigorous  physics-based  subgrid  hot-spot  model 
from  simulations  of  spherical  void 
collapse  in  explosive  crystals  using  a  newlydeveloped code RocSVC. The model prescribes a 
time-dependent energy release due to the hot-spot 
and  accounts  for  varying  pore  size  and  shock 
pressure.  This  model  is  superior  to  the  previous 
density  drop  model 
simulations that recreate the complex dynamics of 
the pore collapse. As a result this new model is an 
important step toward predictively modeling shock 
to detonation transition at the mesoscale. 
Physics-based Pore Collapse Model 
In the Borne experiments2 the wave transient 
time  across  a  cylindrical  sample  diameter    42 
mm length  50 mm is approximately 8 Ps. This 
time  corresponds  to  the  case  when  the  shock  has 
transitioned  into  a  detonation  wave.  Thus  any 
dynamics associated with a hot-spot formation and 
ignition  must  be  on  a  timescale  that  is  much 
shorter than 8 Ps. Additionally Menikoff3 states  
For a strong shock P  10 GPa we note 
approximately  200  ns.  Hot-spots  must 
react fast on this timescale say within 20 
In addition Menikoff showed numerically that 
plastic  work  or  viscous  heating  are  necessary 
dissipative  mechanisms  for  peak  temperatures 
generated  by  void  collapse  to  reach  beyond  1000 
K  the  critical  temperature  needed  for  initiation 
i.e.  shock  dissipation  alone  is  not  sufficient  for 
initiation  of  chemical  reaction  to  take  place.  The 
results of the  void collapse model presented below 
are consistent with both the experiments of Borne 
and the work of Menikoff. 
Spherical Void Collapse 
where the shock traveling  time is on the order of 
the  void  collapse 
the  void  collapses 
asymmetrically.  To  describe  these  events  full 
numerical  simulations  must  be  carried  out2.  For 
void  diameters  less  than    10  microns  the  shock 
traveling time is much faster than the pore collapse 
time  and  the  shock  is  assumed  to  pass  over  the 
pore  instantaneously  setting  up  a  hydrostatic 
pressure field in the material surrounding the pore. 
In  this  case  the  pore  is  assumed  to  collapse 
symmetrically  and  a  model  can  be  derived  to 
describe these events.  
RocSVC  was  developed 
symmetric collapse of a spherical void. It includes 
the effects of mass and heat transfer in the pore in 
the  surrounding  condensate  and  at  the  boundary 
between  the  two.  The  condensate  is  treated  as 
incompressible  and  the  pressure  in  the  pore  is 
treated  as  uniform.  The  governing  equations  are 
cast in spherical coordinates for a reference frame 
that  follows  an  evolving  boundary  between  the 
pore  gas  and  condentate.  The  result  is  a  fastrunning  1-D  code  that  was  used  to  generate 
hundreds of simulation results to form the basis for 
our analytic hot-spot model. 
Fig. 1 provides an illustration of the problem 
configuration.  A  shock  is  traveling  to  the  right 
with speed D. The cavity is defined by the domain 
g with radius a and is assumed to be filled with 
air.  Surrounding  the  cavity  is  the  solid  crystal 
assumed  spherical  with  outer  radius  b  and  inner 
radius  a.  The  region  s  denotes  the  state  of  the 
solid behind the shock and the region c0 denotes 
the  state  of  the  solid  ahead  of  the  shock.  Under 
shock loading the boundary of the cavity at and 
the  outer  boundary  of  the  solid  bt  deforms  in 
Energetic  materials  contain  voids  located 
within  the  crystals  as  impurities  or  within  the 
matrix  binder.  It  is  natural  to  suppose  that  the 
pores  have  a  wide  range  of  diameters  from 
fractions  of  a  micron  up  to  hundreds  of  microns. 
Evidence  suggests  that  for  large  void  diameters 
Fig. 1. RocSVC model configuration. 
Published by the Office of Naval Research in the Proceedings of the 15th International Detonation Symposium. 
the  shock  passes  over 
The cavity is assumed to be sufficiently small 
instantaneously. Our model is therefore written in 
a frame of reference moving with the speed of the 
fluid behind the shock and in this reference frame 
we  assume  spherical  symmetry  so  the  initial 
inward  radial  velocity  is  taken  to  be  zero.  The 
initial state of the temperature Ts and the density of 
the  condensate  Uc    Us  can  be  found  from  the 
We  use  the  MieGruneisen  equation  of  state 
to  determine  the  post-shock  conditions  in  the 
HMX  a  density  based  relationship  to  determine 
the melt temperature and a variable expression for 
the heat capacity Cv as a function of temperature. 
For more details see the work of Jackson5. 
Fig.  2  shows  the  radius  of  the  pore  5  m 
subjected to various shock pressures as a function 
of  time.  From  this  figure  we  can  see  a  clear 
relationship  between  the  minimum  pore  size  and 
the shock strength as the shock gets stronger the 
time  to  pore  collapse  decreases.  We  also  see  that 
radius  decreases  with 
increasing  shock  pressure  which  is  due  to  an 
increased temperature behind the stronger shocks. 
The increased temperature means that less energy 
needs to be deposited by plastic work to reach the 
temperature  required  for  reaction  and  thus  the 
gasification of the condensate will begin at a larger 
pore  radius.  Fig.  3  shows  the  energy  production 
rate  as  a  function  of  time  for  the  5  micron  pore. 
Again  we see a clear relationship between  shock 
pressure  and  the  magnitude  of  the  reaction  rate 
increasing  shock  pressure  results  in  increasing 
reaction  rate  and  decreasing  time  to  maximum 
Subgrid Model Development Based on Spherical 
Pore Collapse Simulations 
A  parameter  study  was  run  with  RocSVC  to 
study  the  effects  of  varying  pore  size  and  shock 
pressure in HMX. The simulations  were run  with 
Illinois  Rocstars  ROCUQ6 
Reduced-OrderClustering-Uncertainty-Quantification 
framework.  This  framework  was  initially  designed  to 
reduce  computational  effort  when  performing 
uncertainty  analysis  with  long-running  simulation 
codes  by  analyzing  the  results  of  hundreds  to 
thousands of reduced-order model simulations and 
Fig.  2.  Pore  radius  as  a  function  of  time  for 
shock pressures of 1 2 3 4 and 5 GPa over a 
Fig.  3.     as  a  function  of  time  for  shock 
pressures of 1 2 3 4 and 5 GPa over a 5 Pm 
mapping  them  onto  results  obtained  with  a  few 
high fidelity simulations. Here ROCUQ is initially 
being  used  to  perform  the  parameter  study  with 
RocSVC  treating  it  as  a  reduced-order  model  for 
pore collapse. To simplify the data analysis effort 
only  pressure  was  varied  by 
framework over 100 data points ranging from 0.5 
Published by the Office of Naval Research in the Proceedings of the 15th International Detonation Symposium. 
to  5  GPa.  Simulation  points  were  chosen  from  a 
Latin  Hypercube  Sample  with  a  uniform 
distribution.  To  gather  results  for  differing  pore 
sizes 4 separate ROCUQ runs were performed for 
radii of 1.0 2.5 5.0 and 10 microns.  
The RocSVC results shown so far demonstrate 
that  the  energy  deposited  by  the  collapsing  hotspot  is  significant.  We  use  the  magnitude  of  this 
displacement as well as the timescale to define our 
model  and  treat  the  collapsing  hot-spot  as  an 
energy  source.  We  consider  the  reactive  Euler 
energy and species consumption equations shown 
center of the hot-spot xi yi with the center being 
advected  at  the  velocity  in  which  in  resides.  We 
allow  the  hot-spot  to  advect  once  the  shock  has 
passed since the RocSVC is written in a frame of 
reference  moving  with  the  speed  uHS  just  behind 
the shock i.e. the post-shock speed. The function 
fW is given in Eq. 3. 
The  induction  time  for  the  ith  hot-spot  is  tai  the 
corresponding  fall-off  time  is  tbi  and  GHSi  is  a 
measure  of  how  fast 
consumed. The function fW is plotted in Fig. 4 for 
representative  values.  The  power 
deposition  for  each  hot-spot  is  sustained  for  a 
period of tbi  tai with the parameter tai computed 
from RocSVC results.  
Here  U  is  the  density  u
is  the  velocity  p  is  the 
pressure E is the total energy per unit volume Y is 
the mass fraction of the reactant and Q is the heat 
release  parameter.  The  species  consumption  rate 
c is defined by a simple one-step kinetic scheme. 
We note that the heat released by the pore and the 
species reaction do not necessarily need to be the 
same  although  we  treat  them  as  the  same  in  this 
work.  The  species  consumption  rate  due  to  the 
collapsing  pore  HS  is  defined  by  our  hot-spot 
To  model  the  energy  deposition  we  modify 
the species consumption rate to include the effects 
of  the  collapsing  hot-spot  Eq.  1.  We  choose  a 
form similar to that of Regele7. Assuming there are 
NHS hot-spots centered at xi yi i  1NHS to be 
simulated  our  species  consumption  contribution 
from the hot-spot is given by Eq. 2.  
Where AHSi is the  magnitude of the energy being 
deposited for hot-spot i Gi is a measure of the hotspot  radius  and  W  is  set  to  zero  the  moment  the 
shock  coincides  with  the  location  of  the  hot-spot 
center.  The  radius  denotes  the  distance  from  the 
Fig. 4. fW for GHS  0.8 ta  10 ns tb  20 ns. 
The  amplitude  of  the  power  deposition  term 
AHSi is also computed from RocSVC results and 
is  related  to  the  total  energy  release  per  unit 
volume  calculated  from  the  hydrostatic  model  as 
Published by the Office of Naval Research in the Proceedings of the 15th International Detonation Symposium. 
 is the species consumption rate 
integrated over the pore volume Vporei with radius 
rai    rita  thus  Vporei  is  the  minimum  pore 
volume and VHSi is the total volume occupied by 
the hot-spot at the mesoscale. The normalization in 
Eq. 4 is necessary to preserve the magnitude of the 
energy being deposited at W  0 by the hydrostatic 
pore collapse model. 
Ignition events are assumed to take place over 
the  time  interval  0    W    ta  with  ta  being  the 
induction time. After ignition events happen on a 
different timescale the pore begins to rebound the 
higher  gas  phase  pressure  sends  a  shock  through 
the condensate and the solid should be treated as 
compressible  instead  of  incompressible.  These 
latter  events  are  not  modeled  per  se  by  our 
hydrostatic  pore  collapse  model  but  rather  are 
subsumed on the timescale ta  W  tb with tb not 
defined.  We  take  tb  to  be  20  ns  to  be  consistent 
with the observations made from the experiements 
of Borne2 and work of Menikoff3. We note that the 
species consumed by the hot-spot model is limited 
by  the  total  species  encompassed  by  the  initial 
pore volume. In the case of a high rate of species 
consumption  energy  release  the  actual  value  of 
tb  is  not  important  as  long  as  it  encompases  the 
entire timeframe for pore collapse. 
To determine the values of the energy release 
minimum pore size rmin in the above  model  we 
seek  analytic  fits  to  the  pore  responses  generated 
by  RocSVC  for  arbitrary  pore  size  and  shock 
pressure.  Figs.  5  6  and  7  show  results  for  our 
parameter  study  for  the  minimum  radius  the 
induction  time  and  the  maximum  reaction  rate 
along with our analytic fits.  
the  analytic  fits  equations 
matching  the  general  shape  of  the  data  as  a 
function of the pressure ratio were fit to the results 
for each pore radius. Then the coefficients for the 
pressure data were fit a second time as a function 
of the pore radius. The fits are listed in Eq. 5 for 
the minimum radius Eq. 6 for the induction time 
and Eq. 7 for the maximum reaction rate.  
Fig. 5. RocSVC results open circles and hotspot  model  fits  dashed  lines  for  minimum 
pore  radius  versus  shock  pressure  ratio  for 
various shock pressures and initial pore sizes.  
Fig. 6. RocSVC results open circles and hotspot  model  fits  dashed  lines  induction  time 
versus  shock  pressure  ratio  for  various  shock 
pressures and initial pore sizes.  
Fig. 7. RocSVC results open circles and hotspot  model fits dashed lines hot-spot species 
consumption  rate  versus  shock  pressure  ratio 
for  various  shock  pressures  and  initial  pore 
Published by the Office of Naval Research in the Proceedings of the 15th International Detonation Symposium. 
Where r0 is the initial pore radius Ps is the shock 
pressure  and  P0  is  a  reference  pressure  in  the 
unshocked  material.  Note  that  for  this  model  we 
define the induction time as the time of maximum 
reaction  rate.  For  smaller  pore  radii  this  time 
coincides  with  the  time  of  minimum  pore  radius 
but  for  larger  radii  and  higher  shock  pressures 
there  is  a  decoupling  between  the  two  and  the 
maximum reaction rate occurs during the rebound 
Numerical Simulation of Shock-to-Detonation 
rapid  material  deformation 
associated  with  shock 
perspective. This approach is the standard in fluid 
mechanics  and  for  this  same  reason  so-called 
hydrodynamic  simulations  are  common  for 
energetic  materials.  Numerical 
appropriate  so  long  as  the  additional  needed 
physics  are  included  and  the  integration  time  is 
Mesoscale Hydrocode Development 
We  have  architected  a  3-D  hydrocode  to 
simulate energetic materials at the mesoscale8. The 
RocSDT3D  code  is  fully  three-dimensional  and 
uses a Cartesian finite volume framework to solve 
the  Euler  equations.  The  solver  has  also  been 
parallelized using the MPI framework designed for 
distributed memory platforms. The user can select 
an  arbitrary  number  of  processors  to  be  used  in 
each  of  the  three  space  directions.  The  physics 
models included in RocSDT3D are the following  
governed  by  the  Euler  equations  for  a 
reactive  medium  with  a  HLLC-  Harten
Riemann solver for shock capturing.  
  Spatial  discretization  with  either  a  2nd  order 
Total  Variation  Diminishing  TVD  scheme 
or  a  5th  order  Weighted  Essentially  NonOscillatory WENO scheme. 
  Temporal  discretization  with  a  3rd  order 
  Reaction  chemistry  based  on  one-step 
Arrhenius kinetics. 
  Material  interface  tracking  using  a  unique 
reconstruction technique.  
  Multiple  Equations  Of  State  EOS  are 
implemented  in  the  code  namely  i  ideal 
gas  ii  stiffened  gas  and  iii  Mie
  An  advanced  hot-spot  model  based  on 
analytic fits to results obtained with RocSVC 
simulations of spherical pore collapse. 
Generation of Realistic Microstructure 
It  has  long  been  recognized  that  the  key 
materials  e.g.  burning  rate  or  response 
dynamic  loading  derive  from  the  morphology 
size  and  size  distribution  of 
crystals.  Defects  in  the  pack  such  as  voids  and 
cracks can also be important and their shape and 
Published by the Office of Naval Research in the Proceedings of the 15th International Detonation Symposium. 
the  aggregate  and 
distribution  can  crucially  influence  the  properties 
behavior.  Any  attempt  to  model  heterogeneous 
materials  in  detail  must  include  a  procedure  for 
constructing a realistic microstructure. In our work 
on  solid  propellants  explosives  and  other 
heterogeneous materials we have used a state-ofthe-art  random  packing  algorithm  to  construct 
initial  morphologies.  Fig.  8  shows  a  pack  for  an 
HMX-based  explosive  generated  by  Rocpack9. 
This pack represents a 0.86 mm cube of explosive 
the  simulation  contains  approximately  500  HMX 
particles  with  a  median  particle  size  of  250  m 
having a Gaussian distribution in the range of 220 
 280 m. Imperfections are present in the pack in 
the  form  of  pores  and  small  voids.  In  the  pack 
intragranular void volume is 0.45 of the particle 
volume.  In  this  simulation  the  voids  are  assumed 
to  be  spherical  with  a  diameter  that  is  randomly 
distributed  between  15  and  35  m  and  results  in 
1075  intragranular  voids  embedded  in  the  HMX 
experimental  batch  3 
Fig. 8. HMX-based explosive 
pack made with Rocpack. 
and contains HMX crystals ranging in size from 40 
to  700  microns.  The  pack  is  periodic  in  all 
directions  so  that  multiple  samples  may  be 
stacked  next  to  one  another  to  generate  larger 
GoNo Go simulations with Borne packs 
The focus of the simulations  reported here is 
the experimental work of Borne2 who considered 
the role of crystal impurities and defects in a HMX 
system.  The  explosive  packs  consisted  of  HMX 
crystals in the 200 to 300 micron range suspended 
in  an  inert  wax  binder  and  were  70  HMX  by 
mass.  The  experiments  were  performed  on  three 
batches  with  average  internal  defect  volumes  of 
0.1  0.3  and  0.45.  In  the  experiments  a 
projectile  collides  with  the  pack  transmitting  a 
shock through the system. Measurements of shock 
transit  times  through  the  pack  show  a  large 
decrease  when  detonation  occurs  which 
correlated with the impact velocity. 
The current pack length is 5.92 mm and it has 
a  width  and  thickness  of  0.74  mm.  The  pack  for 
Fig.  9.  Heterogeneous  pack  with  size  of  0.74  x 
5.92  x  0.74  mm3  consisting  of  500  HMX 
particles red of size approximately 250 Pm in a 
wax  binder  blue.  Hot-spots 
represented by white spheres. 
crystals for batch 3. Fig. 9 presents the generated 
3-D pack showing the particles in the pack red 
the wax binder blue and the location of hot-spots 
For  the  No-Go  case  we  consider  an  initial 
shock  pressure  of  1  GPa  Fig.  10  shows  the 
fractions  at  1.9  s  after  projectile  impact  initial 
shock pressure. From the temperature and density 
contours  in  Fig.  10  the  traces  of  hot-spots  are 
clearly  seen  indicated  by  locally  lowered  density 
and  increased  temperature.  In  this  case  the  weak 
shock  pressure  is  insufficient  to  transition  this 
system  to  detonation  as  indicated  by  the  lack  of 
species  consumption.  The  post-shock  region 
shown by the higher density close to 1900 kgm3 
and  2000  kgm3  in  the  binder  and  particles 
respectively is compressed relative to  that of the 
pre-shock  region  1000  kgm3  in  the  binder  and 
1891  kgm3  inside  the  particles.  The  pressure  is 
higher than the initial shock pressure 1 GPa near 
the  shock  front  but  fluctuates  about  the  initial 
shock pressure downstream of the front. There is a 
Published by the Office of Naval Research in the Proceedings of the 15th International Detonation Symposium. 
Fig. 10. Mid-section of heterogeneous pack shown in Fig. 9 at initial shock pressure of 1 GPa top to 
bottom density  pressure p temperature T and normalized species concentration Y at 1.9 s 
after shock impact. 
temperature  increase  at  the  location  of  hot-spots 
that  is  not  sufficient  to  cause  ignition  and  further 
reaction species consumption. 
Fig. 11 shows pressure along the centerline of 
the pack at several times from 0 to 1.9 s with an 
interval  of  0.4  s.  The  distance  between  shock 
fronts  at  regular  time  intervals  is  nearly  constant 
indicating  little  or  no  acceleration  of  the  shock 
front due to detonation. 
For  the  Go  igniting  case  we  consider  a 
shock  pressure  of  3  GPa  with  the  resulting 
density  pressure  temperature  and  normalized 
species  shown  at  0.33  s  after  impact  in  Fig.  12. 
The  evolution  of  pressure 
velocities  at  various 
centerline is shown in Fig. 13.  
From the species concentration in Fig. 12 we 
see that there is a transition to detonation from the 
fact that the species is fully consumed immediately 
after  the  shock  front.  The  axial  distribution  of 
density  pressure  and  temperature  in  Fig.  12 
shows increasing values from left to right with the 
highest values in the region of the shock front. We 
see  that  the  regions  initially  occupied  by  HMX 
Fig.  11.  Instantaneous  pressure  along 
centerline of the pack in the shock propagation 
direction at various times after impact of 1 GPa 
particles  become  less  dense  due  to  the  rapid 
expansion of the detonation products after burning 
and  that  the  pressure  and  temperature  increase 
from left to right reaching peak values of 40 GPa 
and  5000  K  near  the  shock  front.  Both  materials 
experience compression near the shock front with 
densities  over  2500  kgm3  in  the  binder.  The 
Published by the Office of Naval Research in the Proceedings of the 15th International Detonation Symposium. 
Fig. 12. Mid-section of heterogeneous pack shown in Figure 9 at initial shock pressure of 3 GPa and 
0.33 s after shock impact top to bottom density  pressure p temperature T and normalized 
species concentration Y. 
the  shock  front  as  well  as  an  increased  distance 
between the waveforms when compared to Fig. 11 
indicating that the shock wave has accelerated into 
a detonation wave. When we compare the distance 
between the shock fronts at the times plotted with 
those  shown  in  Fig.  11  we  see  that  the  distance 
between the shocks is more than half that observed 
in  the  No-Go  case  indicating  that  the  shock  is 
moving  roughly  twice  as  fast.  For  an  increase  in 
shock pressure from 1 to 3 GPa we would expect 
a roughly 20 increase in the speed of the shock. 
Our observation of a 100 increase in shock speed 
strengthened  by  the  energy  release  and  that  the 
shock has transitioned to a detonation wave. 
Qualitative Validation Against Experimental Data 
Fig.  14  shows  the  wave  transit  times  as 
calculated  by  Borne2.  We  see  that  for  batch  3 
transition  to  detonation  was  observed  around  3.6 
GPa. Simulations with our new physics-based hotspot  model  predict  that  the  transition  occurs 
somewhere  between  1  and  3  GPa.  Hence  our 
threshold  but  it  is  in  reasonable  agreement  with 
the  experiments.  We  emphasize  that  our  model 
Fig.  13.  Instantaneous  pressure  along 
centerline of the pack in the shock propagation 
direction at various times after impact of 1 GPa 
transverse  velocity  shows  isotropic  distribution 
with stronger fluctuations near the shock front. 
Similar to Fig. 11 Fig. 13 shows the evolution 
of pressure temperature and velocities at various 
times from 0 to 0.55 s with an interval of 0.11 s. 
We  see  an  increase  in  both  the  peak  pressures  at 
Published by the Office of Naval Research in the Proceedings of the 15th International Detonation Symposium. 
without  tuning  our  hot-spot  model  or  reaction Micron-scale Reactive Atomistic Simulations of Void Collapse and Hot spot Growth in 
Pentaerythritol Tetranitrate 
Tzu-Ray Shan Ryan Wixom Aidan P. Thompson a 
Sandia National Laboratories 
Albuquerque New Mexico 87185 USA 
Abstract.  Material defects and other heterogeneities such as dislocations micro-porosity 
and  grain  boundaries  play  key  roles  in  the  shock-induced  initiation  of  detonation  in 
energetic  materials.      Molecular  dynamics  simulations  using  the  ReaxFF  reactive 
interatomic potential allow direct study of the chemistry and physics of shockwave energy 
localization at a hot spot following void collapse without making assumptions about the 
material  behavior.    Building  on  previous  work  we  have  developed  a  simulation 
methodology that has for the first time enabled us to simulate the formation and growth of 
a  hot  spot  in  PETN  on  nanosecond  time  scale  and  micron  length  scale.    For  a  shock 
velocity of 4.6 kms we observe hot spot growth in the forward axial direction at a rate of 
approximately 0.1 kms. 
that  heterogeneities 
Material  defects  and  other  heterogeneities 
such  as  dislocations  micro-porosity  and  grain 
boundaries  play  key  roles  in  the  shock-induced 
initiation  of  detonation  in  energetic  materials.  
Continuum hydrodynamics shock simulations have 
shockwave  energy  in  small  regions.1    This  local 
excitation  of  the  molecules  allows  exothermic 
chemical  reactions  to  occur  leading  to  further 
energy  release  and  initiation.    Beyond  this  basic 
understanding  many  of  the  details  are  poorly 
resolve  the  interior  of  shocked  samples  on  the 
relevant  time  scale  and  length  scale.    The  results 
from hydrodynamic shock simulations are strongly 
dependent  on  the  materials  models  chosen  for 
properties such as strength viscosity and reaction 
kinetics  none  of  which  are  calibrated  on  these 
time scales and length scales.   
the  material  behavior 
heterogeneities  from  a  different  point  of  view.  
This  approach  puts  strong  limitations  on  the 
accessible length scales and time scales but makes 
no  assumptions  about  the  material  properties.  
entirely  by  the  interatomic  potential  used  which 
can  be  constructed  to  reproduce  high-accuracy 
quantum  mechanical  calculations  for  many  small 
configurations  of  atoms.    By  using  a  reactive 
interatomic  potential  the  mutual  coupling  of 
deformation  can  be  explored  in  a  consistent 
We  are  using  reactive  MD  to  explore  the 
effect  of  nanoscale  voids  on  hot  spot  growth  and 
initiation  in  pentaerythritol  tetranitrate  PETN 
crystals under weak shock conditions.  We use the 
reactive  force  field  ReaxFF2  3  as  implemented  in 
the  LAMMPS4  molecular  dynamics  simulation 
  Previously  we  have  validated  the 
accuracy  of  the  ReaxFF  description  for  PETN  by 
comparing  MD  simulations  of  shocked  perfect 
PETN crystal with experimental measurements of 
impact and shock velocity5.  In that work we also 
compared  calculated  energy  barriers  for  various 
dissociation  pathways  with  quantum  mechanical 
calculations.    More  recently  we  have  performed 
large-scale reactive non-equilibrium MD NEMD 
simulations of weak shocks in PETN containing a 
spherical  void  20  nm  in  diameter.6  We  observed 
the  formation  of  a  hot  spot  and  exothermic 
reaction  at  the  downstream  surface  of  the  void.  
Because of the relatively small system size used it 
was not possible to run the simulation long enough 
to observe hot spot growth which would provide 
clear evidence of the onset of initiation.   
the  sample  dimension 
In  this  manuscript  we  are  addressing  this 
issue  by  applying 
simulations  in  both  space  and  time  which  will 
allow us to observe hot spot growth on the scale of 
microns  and  nanoseconds.    To  extend  the  length 
scale we switched from a spherical to a cylindrical 
void  geometry.    The  cylindrical  symmetry  allows 
transverse  direction  while  greatly  increasing  the 
dimensions  in  the  other  transverse  direction  and 
the shock direction.  To extend the timescale we 
absorbing  boundary 
condition  method7  when  the  shockwave  reaches 
the free surface.  In this method a layer of atoms at 
the free surface is frozen while all the other atoms 
undergo normal dynamics as before.  This not only 
allows  us  to  continue  the  simulation  for  a  much 
longer time as if the shockwave had continued to 
propagate  into  uncompressed  material  but  also 
enables us to observe the mutual coupling between 
exothermic  chemical  reactions  and  hot  spot 
Results and Discussions 
In this work we first prepared a PETN crystal 
containing a spherical void 20 nm in diameter and 
a  PETN  crystal  containing  a  cylindrical  void  20 
nm  in  diameter.    Illustrated  in  Figure  1  are 
snapshots  of  the  two  PETN  crystals.    The  PETN 
crystal with a 20 nm spherical void has dimensions 
of 61.4  40.3  41.9 nm3 and contains 8.9 million 
atoms.  The one with a 20 nm cylindrical void has 
dimensions of 61.4  40.3  1.3 nm3 and contains 
270 thousand atoms.  The crystals are periodic in y 
and  z  directions  and  non-periodic 
direction which is parallel to 110.   
Fig.  1.  Oblique  views  of  the  PETN  crystals 
containing a 20 nm spherical void left and a 20 
nm cylindrical void right. For the spherical void 
left  snapshot  half  of  the  system  was  made 
invisible to expose the void. 
Figure  2  illustrates  our  NEMD  simulation  of 
shockwave propagation in the PETN crystal with a 
20 nm spherical void.  A supported shockwave is 
initiated at the left 110 surface by driving it at 2 
kms against a rigid and reflective wall imitating 
an  infinite  impedance  impactor.    The  shockwave 
propagates  through  the  crystal  and  reaches  the 
upstream  void  surface  at  1.6  ps  Figure  2a.  
Fragments from the upstream void surface which 
is  mostly  NO2  and  C5H8O10N3  continue  to  travel 
across  the  void  Figures  2b-d  and  collides  with 
the down stream void surface at 5.6 ps Figure 2e.  
This jet of fragments travels across the void with a 
time-of-flight  velocity  of  5.0  kms.    This  is 
substantially higher than the expected 2up velocity 
of 4 kms expected to occur behind a planar release 
wave.  This increase in particle velocity is due to 
the  lensing  effect8  of  the  curved  void  surface.  
After  the  collision  between  the  jet  of  upstream 
fragments and the downstream void surface a hot 
spot forms. The shockwave continues on to reach 
the opposite free surface of the crystal at 10.5 ps.  
Fig. 2. Color online Sequence of snapshots illustrating the propagation of the shockwave through the 
PETN crystal and void collapse of the 20 nm spherical void. a 1.6 ps b 2.6 ps c 3.6 ps d 4.6 ps e 
5.6 ps and f 9.6 ps.  Atoms color coded by 110 axial velocity dark blue is -2 kms cyan is 0 kms red 
is 5 kms.  Impact velocity is 2 kms. 
Illustrated  in  Figure  3  are  the  corresponding 
temperature maps in the shocked PETN crystal as 
a function of time.  The temperature is calculated 
by grouping atoms into small cubic regions based 
on  their  positions  and  the  temperature  of  each 
region  is  calculated  as  the  average  kinetic  energy 
of each atomic degree of freedom after subtracting 
the  mass-weighted  streaming  velocity  of  all  the 
atoms in the region.  To compare with the PETN 
crystal containing the cylindrical void only a thin 
slice  that  is  1.3  nm  thick  and  cuts  through  the 
center  of  the  PETN  crystal  is  used  in  calculating 
the temperature maps.  This thin slice contains 270 
thousand  atoms.    Although  the  jet  of  upstream 
fragments already formed at 4.6 ps Figure 3a the 
temperature  of  the  jet  is  low  since  most  of  the 
kinetic energy is due to the streaming velocity.  7.6 
ps  after  initial  impact  the  hot  spot  is  well 
developed  and  distinct  from  the  artificial  heating 
occurring  directly  adjacent  to  the  reflective  wall 
Figure 3c.  At 9.6 ps Figure 3d the hot spot has 
noticeably spread transversely and axially. 
For shockwave propagating through the PETN 
crystal  containing  a  20  nm  cylindrical  void  the 
snapshots are illustrated in Figure 4.  The impact 
velocity  is  again  2  kms  and  the  shockwave 
reaches the upstream void surface at 1.6 ps Figure 
4a  but  the  fragments  from  the  upstream  void 
surface do not reach the down stream void surface 
until  5.9  ps  Figure  4e.    The  time-of-flight 
velocity of this jet of fragments is 4.6 kms which 
indicates  a  weaker  lensing  effect  due  to  the 
cylindrical  void  configuration.    A  hot  spot  forms 
after  the  collision  between  the  jet  of  upstream 
the  downstream  void  surface.
Fig. 3. Color online Temperature of the PETN crystal containing the 20 nm spherical void at a 4.6 ps 
b 5.6 ps c 7.6 ps and d 9.6 ps.  Black region corresponds to the void dark blue is 300K green is 
1500K yellow is 2500K red is 4000K.  Impact velocity is 2 kms. 
Fig.  4.  Color  online  Sequence  of  snapshots  illustrating  the  propagation  of  the  shockwave  through  the 
PETN crystal and void collapse of the 20 nm cylindrical void. a 1.6 ps b 2.6 ps c 3.6 ps d 4.6 ps 
e 5.9 ps and f 9.6 ps.  Atoms color coded by 110 axial velocity dark blue is -2 kms cyan is 0 kms 
red is 5 kms.  Impact velocity is 2 kms. 
the  PETN  crystal  containing 
Figure 5 shows the corresponding temperature 
cylindrical void.  We find that the cylindrical void 
of  the  same  size  produces  a  hot  spot  that  is  less 
intense than the spherical void.  7.6 ps after initial 
impact Figure 5c the hot spot is just starting to 
develop.    At  9.6  ps  Figure  5d  the  hot  spot  has 
compared  to  the  crystal  with  the  spherical  void.  
Note  that  the  artificial  heating  occurring  directly 
adjacent  to  the  reflective  wall  is  also  heating  up 
the crystal from the wall. 
Illustrated  in  Figure  6  is  the  evolution  of  the 
average  temperature  of  the  PETN  crystals  as  the 
hot  spots  develop.    For  the  crystal  with  the 
spherical void only a thin slice that is 1.3 nm thick 
containing the same number of atoms as the crystal 
with the cylindrical void is used in calculating the 
temperatures.  The spherical void creates a higher 
overall  temperature  compared  to  the  cylindrical 
void  due  to  the  stronger  lensing  effect  when 
curvature  occurs  in  two  dimensions  rather  than 
Fig. 5. Color online Temperature of the PETN crystal containing the 20 nm cylindrical void at a 4.6 ps 
b 5.6 ps c 7.6 ps and d 9.6 ps.  Black region corresponds to the void dark blue is 300K green is 
1500K yellow is 2500K red is 4000K.  Impact velocity is 2 kms. 
Fig. 6.  Time evolution of average temperatures 
during shockwave propagation in PETN crystals 
containing spherical red curve and cylindrical 
void blue curve.   Impact velocity is 2 kms. 
Although  the  temperatures  are  lower  in  the 
cylindrical void configuration phenomena leading 
to  hot  spot  formation  including  jetting  of  the 
upstream  void  fragments  void  collapse  and 
collision  between  upstream  void  fragments  and 
equivalent to those occurring in the spherical void 
investigate hot spot formation due to void collapse 
and subsequent growth of hot spot on the micronscale  using  the  cylindrical  void  configuration 
which  allows  us  to  greatly  reduce  the  size  of  the 
simulation cell in one transverse direction. 
therefore  reasonable 
Illustrated in Figure 7 is a micron-scale PETN 
crystal  containing  a  20  nm  cylindrical  void.    The 
crystal has dimensions of 300  220  1.3 nm3 and 
has  8.6  million  atoms. 
simulation  setup  is  exactly  the  same  as  described 
before.  With  an  impact  velocity  of  2  kms  this 
larger  simulation  was  run  for  52  ps  before  the 
shockwave  reached  the  opposite  free  surface.    At 
the  previously  observed  heating 
originating  from  the  reflective  wall  had  engulfed 
distinguishing  the  effect  of  the  void  from  that  of 
the reflective wall.  To avoid this difficulty we ran 
a new simulation with a lower impact velocity of 
spot  preventing  us 
Fig. 7. Oblique view of the micron-scale PETN 
crystal containing a 20 nm cylindrical void. 
Shown in Figures 8a 8b and 8c is a sequence 
of temperature maps depicting the propagation of 
the  shockwave  through  the  PETN  crystal  and  the 
formation of the hot spot.  The mechanism of hot 
spot formation is the same as previously described.    
With  an  impact  velocity  of  1.25  kms  heating  at 
the wall is negligible. 
The shockwave reaches the free surface after 
64.6  ps.    At  this  point  the  backward  rarefaction 
wave that would normally form at the free surface 
is  suppressed  using  the  shock-front  absorbing 
boundary  condition  ABC  method7.    This  allows 
us to continue the simulation to 120.0 ps as if the 
shockwave  had  continued 
uncompressed  material.    Temperature  maps  from 
the  simulations  with  ABC  applied  are  shown  in 
Figures 8d 8e and 8f from which we can observe 
the steady growth of the hot spot. 
We  can  observe  the  growth  of  the  hot  spot 
more clearly by extracting temperature profiles or 
lineouts from the full temperature maps.  Figure 9 
shows profiles in the axial x direction.  There is a 
measurable  and  persistent  axial  growth  of  the 
direction  with  a  growth  rate  of  order  0.1  kms.  
Any growth in the backward direction is less than 
the  fluctuations  in  the  sample.    Figure  10  shows 
profiles in the transverse y direction.  The region 
of  elevated  temperature  initially  grows  laterally 
and  symmetrically  but  after  80  ps  any  growth  is 
less  than  the  sampling  fluctuations.    In  all  cases 
the  peak  temperature  in  the  hot  spot  remains 
Fig. 8. Color online Temperature of the micron-scale PETN crystal containing the 20 nm cylindrical void 
at a 0.0 ps b 30.0 ps c 64.6 ps d 80.0 ps e 100.0 ps and f 120.0 ps.  Subfigures a b and c are 
from the normal shock simulation and subfigures d e and f are from the ABC simulation.  Black region 
corresponds to the void dark blue is 250K light blue is 500K yellow is 1250K red is 2000K.  Shock-front 
absorbing boundary condition is applied to the right free surface.  Impact velocity is 1.25 kms. 
Axial distance from reflective wall along x nm
Lateral distance from periodic boundary along y nm
Fig. 10. Time-evolution of the temperature profile 
in the transverse direction near the hot spot in the 
micron-scale simulation. 
found in the system.  Very little NO2 is formed as 
the  shockwave  propagates  through  the  perfect 
region  of  the  crystal  before  hitting  the  upstream 
void  surface  at  24  ps.    Concentration  of  NO2 
increases dramatically after the shockwave passes 
through  the  upstream  void  surface. 
species such as H2O and CO2 only form after the 
Fig. 9. Time-evolution of the temperature profile 
in the axial direction near the hot spot in the 
micron-scale simulation. 
Hot  spot  growth  is  coupled  to  exothermic 
  By  analyzing  the  timechemical  reactions. 
averaged  bond  order  values  for  nearby  pairs  of 
atoms  in  the  simulation  we  have  the  ability  to 
the  occurrence  of  different 
chemical species.  Illustrated in Figure 11 are total 
numbers of PETN NO2 H2O and CO2 molecules 
Figure  11.  Chemical  species  with  significant 
concentration  found  in  the  micron-scale  PETN 
crystal containing the 20 nm cylindrical void. 
Building on previous work we have extended 
the  reach  of  realistic  non-equilibrium  reactive 
molecular  dynamics  to  the  unprecedented  micron 
and  nanosecond  scales.    We  have  confirmed  that 
the  use  of  a  cylindrical  void  and  the  shockwave 
absorbing boundary condition give results that are 
consistent  with  previous  results  obtained  with  a 
spherical  void  and 
conditions but with greatly reduced computational 
cost.    This  has  enabled  us  for  the  first  time  to 
directly observe the growth of a hot spot following 
in  PETN  under  weak  shock 
conditions.  For a shock velocity of 4.6 kms we 
observed  hot  spot  growth  in  the  forward  axial 
direction at a rate of 0.1 kms.  We are continuing 
this micron-scale simulation to observe the further 
growth  of  the  hot  spot  and  coalescence  with  its 
periodic images. We expect that this will lead in to 
improved  understanding  of  the  role  played  by 
voids  and  other  local  heterogeneities  in  initiation 
energetic  materials  under  weak 
collision between the upstream fragments and the 
downstream void surface and are only found inside 
the  developed  hot  spot.    No  N2  was  found  in  the 
system.  Were it not for the 20 nm cylindrical void 
no  heated  regions  would  occur  and  no  chemical 
reactions  leading  to  the  formation  of  product 
species would occur.b 
This  research  used  resources  of  the  Argonne 
Leadership  Computing  Facility  at  Argonne 
National  Laboratory  which  is  supported  by  the 
Office  of  Science  of  the  U.S.  Department  of 
Energy under contract DE-AC02-06CH11357. 
Sandia  National  Laboratories  is  a  multiprogram  laboratory  managed  and  operated  by 
Sandia Corporation a wholly owned subsidiary of 
Lockheed  Martin  Corporation 
Department of Energys National Nuclear Security 
contract  DE-AC0494AL85000.  SAND2014-15503 J A Meso-Scale Informed Statistical Hot Spot Model for Run-to-Detonation 
George A. Levesque IV Albert L. Nichols III Craig M. Tarver Peter Vitello Fady Najjar 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94550 
Physical and Life Sciences 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94550 
Abstract.  It  is  a  known  challenge  to  leverage  mesoscale  simulations  of  pore-collapse 
under  shock  to  properly  understand  macroscopic  explosive  run-to-detonation  behavior.  
Bottom-up calibration would require accurate understandings of unobservable physics at 
small  scales  which  remains  a  matter  of  much  investigation.    Herein  we  attempt  a  topdown  calibration  of  the  Statistical  Hot  Spot  SHS  model  which  is  macroscale  reactive 
flow model that has parameters that seem relevant to small scale physics.  The calibration 
uses  an  automated  multi-dimensional  optimization  technique  to  match  the  particle 
velocity gauge records for different run-to-detonation experiments on different explosive 
materials PBX-9501 and PBX-9502.  
There have been many investigations which 
are focused on the lower length scales molecular 
dynamics atomic simulations or continuumbased pore-collapse mesoscale simulations. 
However there has been little wok traversing the 
scales to incorporate smaller scale information into 
predicting macroscopic events.  Predictive 
calculations are challenging as a result of 
uncertainty in several simplifying assumptions.  
For example the assumptions to integrate such 
data are usually restricted to spatially distributed 
non-interacting spherical pores interacting with 
clean shock wave of a single size.  We have visited 
and tested these assumptions by simulating 
interacting pores 1 and non-spherical pores in 
drafting and have found significant effects on 
macroscopic performance.  
There is also uncertainty in the parameters 
used for small-scale simulations. For example 
strength of the explosive material has been treated 
with a wide range of viscosities from 68002 to 4.6 
Pa s3 and a calibrated strength model.4 5 Also the 
kinetics used for high explosive decomposition 
have a significant range.6 We have simulated 
ranges in viscosity as have others7 and have 
calculated a wide-range of flame velocities as a 
result of the kinetics8 both of which will have 
significant effect on the integrated behavior in 
In macroscopic simulation of explosive 
decomposition many empirical models exist for 
simulating run-to-detonation behavior these 
include Dagmar HVRB Forest Fire Starkenberg 
SCORE DSD JTF Kennedy Kipp Krakatoa 
AMORC Baer-Nunziato Butler CHARM 
Maiden Massoni XRB Ignition and Growth and 
CREST.9  Generally the first addressed and most 
important feature of run-to-detonation to be 
simulated is the run distance or the distance a 
shock travels before detonation.  However if a 
model was simulating the behavior of nature it 
should also match the higher fidelity 
measurements captured by the recent utilization of 
pressure and particle velocity gauges.10-12  Some 
models have already demonstrated success in 
simulating this time history data.13-15  
Herein we investigate if the Statistical Hot 
Spot Model16-18 can also match the results of the 
particle velocity gauges.  We start investigating the 
parameter space by simulating the time history of 
each gauge in selected shots for two separate 
explosives PBX-9501 and PBX-9502 see Table 
1 with an automated process.   
Table 1.  Investigated composite explosives and 
their formulation percentages by weight.  
Incorporating Mesoscale Information 
The Statistical Hot Spot model uses an initial 
hot spot size  a number of hot spots NR and a 
rate of outward radial burn  that is a function of 
pressure.  These parameters are considered to be 
strongly related to the state variables of pore size 
porosity and deflagration rate data. If true this 
model could easily be recalibrated for explosive 
composites with different pore size distributions 
porosities and even chemical kinetics by 
perturbing the relevant parameter.   
Though direct integration of the accumulated 
small scale simulations may not give us the 
macroscopic behavior predictively yet it does give 
much information that we can use in the 
parameterization of the Statistical Hot Spot model.  
For example some mesoscale simulations of pore 
collapse under shock interaction have created 
volumes of mass with temperatures so high that 
they would burn almost immediately.  Also pore 
collapse simulations have shown that as the shock 
pressure increases the temperature of the resulting 
hot spot also increases.  This means that the 
volume of material that decomposes almost 
immediately increases with pressure.  Also since 
temperature increases everywhere with pressure 
the speed of radial burn also increases with shock 
pressure.  We utilize the bounds and trends of 
these analyses in our multivariable 
Our parameterization of the Statistical Hot 
Spot model can also help us understand the 
appropriateness of the assumptions made in 
developing reactive flow.  For example if pore 
collapse is the primary hot spot mechanism than 
the number of hot spots NR is equal to the number 
of pores in the material.  Others have assumed that 
we can approximate the behavior of a pore 
distribution by using only a single representative 
pore size. Others have also assumed that the 
amount of material immediately burned at each 
pore site is roughly equal to the volume of the 
For our parameterization of the model we 
keep these assumptions in mind.  As a test to these 
assumptions we can test if an accurate 
parameterization exists such that the volume of 
initial pores times the number of pores is equal to 
the experimental densityporosity for each 
simulated shot.  Additionally we use the same 
ignition model as before18 but we have made the 
critical pressure to ignition very low and forced the 
initial pore size to be very small since there is no 
accounting of a variable initial size with pressure.  
Simulation and Model Parameterization 
Run-to-detonation experiments are illustrated 
in fig. 1.19 Here a flyer of either Vistal or Kel-F is 
thrown at a 240 mm diameter 130 mm thick 
target at a velocity which gives the intended shock
pressure.  This pressure is measured in situ with 
Fig.1. Illustration of the experimental setup of the 
run-to-detonation experiments.19  
For our simulations a highly parallelized 
arbitrary-LagrangianEulerian multiphysics 
hydrocode ALE3D is used to evolve the 
hydrodynamics chemical decomposition 
advection and thermodynamics.20 A quasi-one 
dimensional simulation of the experiment is 
simulated with 10 nm refinement.  The impactors 
size and initial velocity is simulated explicitly in 
each test so the pressure impulse is accurate for the 
endurance of the gauge record.  Tracer particles 
are placed in the same locations of the gauges as 
documented10-12 21  and they output particle 
velocity history every 50 ns to a file.  
To find the SHS model parameter set that 
agrees best with experiment a highly-parallelized 
software developed by Sandia National 
Laboratories named DAKOTA Design Analysis 
Kit for Optimization and Terascale Applications 
version 5.2 is used.22  It is capable of design 
optimization parameter estimation uncertainty 
quantification and sensitivity analysis.  DAKOTA 
iteratively chooses the parameters used in the 
hydrocode input based on the previous analysis 
according to the chosen optimization algorithm.  
In this study a hybrid optimization to find the 
minimum difference between the model and the 
experiment was used. In this method an 
evolutionary algorithm initializes a search for the 
best parameter set.  After a fixed number of 
simulations have been completed all parameter 
sets and objective function values are passed to a 
gradient-based method which continues to iterate 
until the objective function converges to an 
adequate solution. A table of a general set of 
optimization parameters is given in table 2. 
Fig. 2. A work-flow diagram of the automated 
optimization process.  
Table 2. A set of optimization parameters that were 
used in our parameterization study. 
Evolutionary Algorithm 
Convergence Tolerance
Since we are using an automated process for 
the parameterization of the model an objective 
function will be calculated for every simulation 
The first shot to be treated to optimization was 
shot 2s-118.  It had a Kel-F flyer which impacted 
at 2.798 kms to produce an input pressure of 
13.78 GPa.  Gauges were located at 0.91 1.41 
1.90 2.42 2.89 3.41 3.88 4.40 4.86 and 5.39 
mm from the impact face. The results of our 
iteration are seen in figure 3 and show good 
agreement.  Divergence may be the result of not 
simulating the gauges as a separate material or by 
discrepancies in tuning the tabular rate of radial 
burn  as a function of pressure.  
conducted in order to evaluate parameter set 
quality. Here we use the square root of the squared 
sum of the residuals that difference the 
experimental data with the simulation result.  See 
Eq 1.  The experimental data is taken from each 
embedded gauge at every 50 ns. The simulated 
gauges have the same output fidelity in time. This 
was the simplest choice that gave reasonable 
Herein  we  conduct  our  parameterization  on 
the  SHS  model  for  a  subset  of  two  different 
experimental sets of data to test the robustness of 
the  functional  form  of  this  reactive  flow  model. 
Different  materials  are  used  for  the  impactor  and 
the explosive in each group of experiments.  
PBX-9502 Experiments 
For PBX-9502 a Jones-Wilkins-Lee JWL 
equation of state was used which has the 
Where p is pressure in Megabars V is the relative 
volume T is the temperature  is the Grneisen 
coefficient CV is the average heat capacity and A 
B R1 and R2 are constants with parameters 
calibrated elsewhere.23 
These tests used a Kel-F impactor of 50 mm 
and were simulated with the suggested equation of 
state.10 Each simulation took 64 s and about 5001000 iterations were conducted per optimization 
attempt. Generally there were six parameters 
subjected to parameterization at any time.  
Parallelization of evaluations was performed as 
much as possible limited by the population size in 
evolutionary algorithm optimization and limited 
by variable number for gradient-based 
optimization. For this much parameter space 5001000 simulations is sparse so there were iterations 
tuning the optimization method where 500-1000 
simulations were submitted each time.  
Fig. 3. Shot 2s-118 data marked in circles every 
50 ns and the simulations time-history for the 
same gauge locations solid lines. Data and 
simulation is colored identically on CD for each 
Agreement for a single shot might be expected 
from a functional form that is robust enough to fit 
complicated data.  However to be a successful 
reactive flow model it must adequately produce 
known data for the entire run-to-detonation 
regime.  More digitization and comparison needs 
to be done for the entire range of experiments. 
PBX-9501 Experiments 
Encouraged by the agreement of the Statistical 
Hot Spot Model with the run-to-detonation 
experiment shot 2s-118 on PBX 9502 the analysis 
is continued on a different explosive material 
PBX-9501. This explosive is known to be more 
sensitive requiring a lower shock pressure to 
eventually run to a detonation.  It is also more 
energetic and burns faster.  The difference in 
energy is captured by the equation of state alone.  
The difference in shock sensitivity between the 
two materials is simulated by the energy difference 
and also by the reactive flow model allowing a 
faster rate of decomposition as controlled by the 
pressureburn rate table and the burn rate 
From the collection of data on PBX-9501 
digitized data was analyzed for Shot 1144.  This 
shot had a Vistal impactor launched at 0.816 kms 
and created a pressure of 5.21 GPa. Gauges were 
at the following locations in cm from the 
specimen face 0.091 0.141 0.190 0.242 0.289 
0.341 0.388 0.440 0.486 and 0.539. 
Constraining the optimization method to only 
changing a few of the parameters at any given 
time the fit in figure 4 was rapidly found.   
Fig. 4. Shot 1144 data on PBX-9501 circles 
connected with dotted lines and the parameterized 
gauge results solid lines. Data and simulation is 
colored identically on CD for each gauge.  
The resulting parameter set is not very 
different from that used for PBX-9502 despite it 
being a different explosive with significantly 
different reaction kinetics. Diamond anvil cell data 
indicates that HMX burns approximately three 
times faster than TATB across a wide pressure 
range.24 The variable with the largest recalibration 
was the burn rate multiplier and it directly scales 
the rate of outward radial burn as a function of 
pressure. For PBX-9501 brm1 was used while 
the PBX-9502 parameterization yielded a 
This lends support that the statistical hot spot 
models functional form could reflect the 
mesoscale behavior that occurs in nature.  
However it could also be that the form is robust 
enough to fit all such data.  In either case where 
accuracy is desired it is possible to calibrate the 
model to available run-to-detonation time history 
These early results breed excitement in the 
capabilities of the statistical hot spot model.  
Ideally more experimental data would be 
incorporated into the parameterization process so 
that wider ranges of porosities are investigated.  
Such investigations would be useful for using the 
same model with parameters of initial hot spot 
size  and hot spot number NR tuned to reflect 
their relationship with porosity for different 
densities of the same explosive type.  This is left 
We have reflected on mesoscale simulations 
for understanding trends relevant for run-todetonation. These mesoscale models showed that 
as pressure increases so does the rate of 
deflagration and also shows that as pressure 
increases the amount of material burned instantly 
also increases. Mesoscale models also bracket the 
allowable range in smallest hot spot size and burn 
rates from hot spots.   
An automated process was developed for 
calibrating multidimensional reactive flow models.  
The model utilized statistical measures of 
agreement with experimental data as an objective 
function of accuracy.  
Fits to PBX-9502 run-to-detonation data was 
found after much calibration of both the 
optimization parameters and the reactive flow 
model.  Agreement across porosities is left for 
future work. Best fits used the smallest allowed 
initial hot spot size variable  of 10 nm which is 
either reflective of the effect of numerous small 
hot spots or is an artifact of the current treatment 
in the ignition model. 
Fits to PBX-9501 run-to-detonation data were 
also found.  The calibration used a similar set of 
parameters as those for PBX-9502 where the burn 
rate multiplier was tuned to be close to the ratio of 
TATBHMX deflagration speeds as seen in 
diamond anvil cell experiments. Further 
7. Chou P. C. Ritman Z. and Liang D. 1994. 
Viscosity and Heat-Conduction Effects in Pore 
Collapse. Mechanics of Materials 17 2-3 295305. 
8. Frank-Kamenetskii D. A. 1955. Diffusion and 
Heat Exchange in Chemical Kinetics. Princeton 
NJ Princeton University Press. 
9. Peugot F. M. W. Sharp and the participants of 
the NIMIC Shock Modeling Group 2002. 
Reactive Models for Hydrocodes Past Present 
and Future. Brussels Belgium National Atlantic 
Treaty Organization. 
10. Gustavsen R. L. Sheffield S. A. Alcon R. 
R. Forbes J. W. Tarver C. M. and Garcia F. 
2001. Embedded electromagnetic gauge 
measurements and modeling of shock initiation in 
the TATB based explosives LX-17 and PBX 
9502. In 12th International Conference of the 
American-Physical-Society Topical-Group-onShock-Compression-of-Condensed-Matter. 
Atlanta Ga pp. 1019-1022. 
11. Gustavsen R. L. Sheffield S. A. Alcon R. R.  
and Hill L. G. 2001. Shock Initiaiton of New and 
Aged PBX 9501 Measured with Embedded 
Electromagnetic Particle Velocity Gauges. Los 
Alamos National Laboratory pp. 1-38. 
12. Gustavsen R. L. Sheffield S. A. and Alcon 
R. R. 2006. Measurements of shock initiation in 
the tri-amino-tri-nitro-benzene based explosive 
PBX 9502 Wave forms from embedded gauges 
and comparison of four different material lots. 
Journal of Applied Physics 99 11. 
13. Handley C. Whitworth N. James H. 
Lambourn  B. and Maheswaran M. A. 2010. The 
CREST reactive-burn model for explosives. In 
Conference on New Models and Hydrocodes for 
Shock Wave Processes in Condensed Matter. 
Paris FRANCE E D P Sciences. 
investigation is needed to determine if this reactive 
flow model truly is multi-material capable. 
This work performed under the auspices of the 
U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence 
Livermore National Laboratory under Contract Reactive Burn Model Optimization Incorporating  
Ignition and Sustained Pulse Data Sets 
Robert J. Dorgan George C. Butler Eric J. Welle 
 Air Force Research Laboratory  Munitions Directorate 
Eglin Air Force Base Florida 32542 
Applied Research Associates Inc.  Emerald Coast Division 
Niceville Florida 32578 
Abstract. Pressure based reactive models have been used successfully by the community 
for  many  years  to  investigate  topics  on  problems  involving  high-velocity  impacts 
penetrations and explosive ignition and detonations. Calibration of models for different 
materials is an important part of the modeling process and typically is performed using 
sustained  pulse  data  from  Pop-plot  experiments.  These  data  provided  the  run-todetonation  behavior  for  explosives  due  to  a  supported  shock  condition.  However 
simulations  using  Pop-plot  derived  coefficients  are  not  generally  able  to  match 
experimental data from thin-pulse-driven explosive ignition tests. This work focuses on 
the development of reactive models based on the combination of thin pulse and sustained 
pulse  data  sets.  The  additional  complexity  incorporated  through  a  wide  spectrum  of 
experimental loading regimes allows for complex computational predictions. The Sandia 
National Laboratory hydrocode CTH is used to develop parameters for various reactive 
burn models including the Ignition  Growth Reactive Burn IGRB model the History 
Variable Reactive Burn HVRB model and the Arrhenius Reactive Burn ARB model. 
In a variant of the Hugh James Initiation HJI 
model1  used  by  Welle2  critical  values  of  shock 
energy  fluence  E  and  power  flux  3  in  the 
acceptor must be exceeded for an explosive to be 
successfully  ignited  and  thus  allow  a  shock-totransition.  The  model  uses  an 
exponential  function 
between  successful  and  unsuccessful  initiation 
events.  Quantifying  initiation  threshold  using  this 
method is a proven tool used to quantify safety and 
performance  characteristics  of  explosive  trains. 
The ability to define the growth to detonation in an 
explosive  is  critical  to  the  development  of  a 
reactive flow model. 
To  illustrate  this  type  of  modified  HJI  data 
Figure  1  plots  thin  pulse  initiation  data  and 
sustained  pulse  data  from  the  literature  for  UltraFine  TATB  at  a  density  of  1.80  gcc  in  energy 
fluence-power  flux  space  where  the  initiation 
threshold  data  were  obtained  from  the  work  of 
Honodel  et  al.3  and  Tarver    May4  and  the 
sustained pulse data were obtained from the works 
of Urtiew et al.5 and Vandersall6. All of these data 
were converted to the modified HJI space utilizing 
the inert equation of states EOS of the flyer and 
the energy limited ignition range thin pulse to the 
power limited ignition range thick pulse.  
Previously developed optimization techniques 
utilized  gap  test  data  e.g.  LSGT  to  introduce 
initiation threshold data7 and showed a significant 
improvement over optimizations that only utilized 
Pop-plot data. The current work is an improvement 
that  utilizes  the  range  of  initiation  thresholds 
defining  the  HJI  curve.  In  addition  the  flyerloaded experimental data used in this work do not 
have the complexity associated with capturing gap 
test  pulse  magnitudes  and  curvatures.  Though 
simulation predictions are dependent on the donor 
explosive  model  selected  as  well  as  the  gap 
material strength and EOS models. 
Optimization  techniques  require  a  figure  of 
to  be  defined  and  minimized. 
Significant  effort  was  put  towards  improving  the 
form  of  the  FOM  used  for  these  optimizations. 
This  included  using  a  scaled  magnitude  of  error 
versus a percent error incorporation of a non-zero 
error  at  the  error  bars  through  the  use  of  a 
parabolic  function  utilizing  log  values  of  data  as 
applicable e.g. POP plot data and improving the 
previously  defined 
total  FOM.  The  FOM 
investigated  here  was  the  root  mean  square  error 
RMS for all individual experimental data points.  
The  initiation  threshold  model  first  proposed 
by  Hugh  James1  was  built  off  the  historically 
recognized Walker-Wasley criterion9 which solely 
relies  upon  a  critical  energy  fluence  criterion  to 
describe  initiation  threshold  behavior.  The  HJI 
criterion  uses  a  function  to  define  initiation 
threshold  based  on  both  energy  fluence  and 
specific  kinetic  energy.  In  the  variant  of  the  HJI 
criterion used by Welle2 the energy fluence E is 
plotted as a function of power flux 3 instead of 
specific kinetic energy as follows 
where  Ec  is  the  critical  energy  fluence  3c  is  the 
critical  power  flux  and  3a  is  the  transition  rate 
Figure 1 Modified Hugh James analysis 
demonstrating Initiation Threshold data and 
Sustained Pulse Data fit to hyperbolic functions 
parameterized  using  a  combination  of  gun 
experiments  wedge  tests  and  gap  tests.  The  gun 
technique  drives  well  defined  shocks  into  the 
energetic systems such that the induced flow field 
can  be  quantified  using  magnetic  or  layered 
gauges.  Wedge  test  experiments  provide  the  runto-detonation  of  the  reactive  material  based  on  a 
given input loading. Gap tests provide the critical 
state for an attenuated donor explosive pulse. 
In order to make the process of material model 
calibration  more  systematic  collaborative  work 
between  AFRL  and  University  of  AlabamaBirmingham7  has  developed  a  procedure  that 
makes  use  of  nonlinear  optimization  to  derive 
optimal  values  of  parameters  in  the  material 
models. The framework has been developed using 
LS-OPT8 to make use of realistic but complex 
optimizations under a wide range of constraints all 
done simultaneously so that a single model can be 
calibrated  to  fit  all  experiments.  This  means  that 
the  optimized  reactive  model  will  be  able  to 
experienced in applications. 
This work focuses on the application of these 
optimization  techniques  on  developing  reactive 
model  parameter  sets  based  on  a  combination  of 
data  defining  the  HJI  thin  pulse  and  sustained 
pulse curves. A reactive model optimized to both 
initiation regimes has a range of application from 
parameter.  This  exponential  form  was  chosen 
based upon the underlying chemical reactions that 
drive  the  heat  release  required  to  enable  a 
successful  ignition  event.  The  power  flux  and 
energy fluence are respectively defined as follows 
where  P  is  the  shock  pressure  up  is  the  particle 
velocity  and  W  is  the  shock  duration  within  the 
acceptor material. Shock conditions in the acceptor 
that lie on the exponential trend line defined by 1 
represent  a  mean  threshold  condition with a  50 
probability of initiation to occur. 
The sustained pulse data for Ultra-Fine TATB 
at  1.8 gcc  shown  in  Figure  2 was obtained  from 
flyer-plate  gas  gun  experiments56  utilizing 
embedded  manganin  gauge  elements  to  obtain 
pressure  profiles  and  time  of  arrivals  TOAs  at 
various  depths  in  the  specimen.  The  run  distance 
was calculated as the intersection of a linear fit to 
the  pre-detonation  TOAs  lower  shock  velocity 
and  a  linear  fit  to  the  post-detonation  TOAs 
higher detonation velocity. The highest pressure 
shot6 used an AD-998 aluminum oxide flyer plate 
and  a  Teflon  impact  plate.  The  remaining  shots5 
utilize  Al-6061  flyer  plates  and  Al-6061  impact 
plates. As will be discussed later error bars were 
needed  for  the  optimization  and  were  assumed 
based on the data. The input pulse for the lowest 
pressure  shot  was  not  large  enough  to  cause  a 
detonation in the UF-TATB sample and so a large 
run  distance  greater  than  35.7mm  and  up  to 
55.7mm was assumed. 
Thin  pulse  initiation  data  Figure  3  for  1.80 
gcc  Ultra-Fine  TATB  was  obtained  from  1  inch 
mylar flyers3 and for 1 inch aluminum flyers4. The 
detonation of a sample was confirmed by utilizing 
an  excess  transit  time  ETT3.  This  ETT  was 
calculated  by  subtracting  the  time  that  it  would 
have  taken  for  a  detonation  wave  to  cross  the 
sample thickness from the actual transit time that 
occurred  experimentally.  Error  bars 
aluminum  flyer  data  were  not  available  and  so 
were assumed from the mylar flyer data. 
In order to convert to the modified HJI space 
displayed  in  Figure  1  the  material  Hugoniots  in 
Table  1  were  assumed  and  impedance  matching 
was  utilized  to  calculate  the  input  pressures 
Figure 2 Comparison of sustained pulse 
experimental data to original model predictions 
Figure 3 Comparison of thin pulse experimental 
data to original model predictions 
particle  velocities  and  shock  velocities.  For  the 
thin pulse data the pulse duration was calculated 
as the time for the flyer rear surface relief wave to 
sustained  pulse  data  the  pulse  duration  was 
calculated  as  the  length  of  time  required  for  the 
inert shock to travel the given run distance. 
Table 1 Hugoniots used for impedance matching 
Not publicly releasable 
Calculations  of  discrete  experimental  setups 
using  experimental  geometries  and  experimental 
data processing techniques provided computational 
experimental  data.  All  flyer  plate  configurations 
were  simulated  using 
the  Sandia  National 
Laboratories  shock  physics  code  CTH13.  The 
program  APREPRO14  was  used  extensively  as  a 
preprocessor for the CTH input decks and several 
Python scripts were developed to post-process the 
As the flyer diameters and run distances were 
such that edge rarefactions did not reach the center 
of the shock front before detonation occurred all 
simulations were done in 1D. The mesh resolution 
for each simulation was selected as the maximum 
of 40 cellsmm and the resolution required for 10 
cells through the flyer thickness. This resulted in a 
resolution  of  approximately  200  cellsmm  for  the 
thinnest pulse configuration. 
In this work phenomenological based reactive 
models  were  used  in  which  the  reactants  and 
products  are  treated  as  single  materials  with  a 
reactants  to  products.  This  method  is  commonly 
used in CTH and has been applied successfully to 
model a wide range of energetic material processes 
such as sympathetic detonation detonation failure 
and  critical  diameter  assessments.  Parameters  for 
the  History  Variable  Reactive  Burn  HVRB 
Arrhenius Reactive Burn ARB and Ignition and 
Growth  Reactive  Burn  IGRB  models15  were 
optimized.  The  various  parameters  defined  for 
each of these models are listed in Table 2 as well 
as the allowable ranges assumed in this work. 
The ARB model15 incorporates a temperaturedependent  Arrhenius  rate  law.  The  rate  law  as  a 
function  of  temperature  T  for  this  model  is  as 
where  O  is  the  extent  of  reaction  F  is  the 
temperature.  The  activation  temperature  can  be 
defined as a function of pressure however in this 
work the pressure dependent term was set to zero 
such that T T. The parameters F and T0 are then 
Table 2 Parameter limits for reactive models 
g1 MBar-y1us-1  2-1.5 
0.0232 0.0250.3 0.5 
 parameter not included in optimization 
used  to  fit  the  experimental  data  as  well  as  a 
threshold temperature Ti below which the reaction 
rate is set to zero. 
The  HVRB  model15  incorporates  a  pressuredependent  rate  law  and  a  time  delay  before 
initiation  of  rapid  reaction.  The  rate  equation  for 
this model is as follows17 
where O is the extent of reaction  I is an integral 
over time t of the pressure P at a mass point and 
  sec  is  used  to  make  I  dimensionless. 
The five parameters PI PR Z M and X are used to 
fit the experimental data. 
The  IGRB  model15  incorporates  a  pressuredependent three step rate law and is based on the 
Lee-Tarver  Ignition    Growth  IG  model 
e.g.184. The rate equation for the IGRB model is 
written as follows17 
where O is the extent of reaction U and U0 are the 
initial  and  current  densities  respectively  s0  is 
parameters  and  3  constraints  are  used  to  fit 
experimental  data.  Due  to  the  large  number  of 
parameters y0 y1 and y2 were used from Tarver  
May4  as  typical  parameters  for  a  TATB  based 
High  Explosive  HE.  Note  that  IG  parameters 
developed  by  codes  other  than  CTH  cannot  be 
directly  used  in  the  CTH  IGRB  model  due  to 
implementation  differences  especially  for  thin 
For  reactive  flow  models  in  addition  to 
defining the evolution of reactants to products it is 
necessary to specify an EOS for the reactants and 
products.  In  this  study  the  IGRB  model  was 
defined using the JWL parameters from Tarver  
May4. For the HVRB and ARB models the CTH 
table  model  denoted  by 
TATBDP19 was selected to model the products. 
Comparing  various  unreacted  EOS  for  crystalline 
TATB  the  Mie-Grneisen  values  from  the  CTH 
database  for  TATB  were  found  to  be  very 
comparable  to  the  shock  states  experimentally 
observed56 and were therefore selected. 
Thin Pulse Initiation Simulations 
Individual  simulations  of  the  various  flyers 
described  previously  were  used  to  probe  a  given 
reactive  models  ability  to  reproduce  thin  pulse 
initiation  behavior.  As  mentioned  previously  the 
ETT  was  used  as  a  criterion  for  determining  the 
critical  flyer  velocity  an  ETT  of  0.8Ps  was 
selected in order to capture this critical state. 
In  order  to  locate  the  critical  velocity  for  a 
given  flyer  thickness  an  iterative  procedure  was 
developed. The flyer velocity corresponding to the 
simulation with the ETT closest to the critical ETT 
was used as the reactive models critical velocity. 
For calculation of the ETT TOAs were extracted 
from the pressure time histories once the pressure 
increased above 0.01 GPa. 
Prior  to  the  optimization  inert  simulations 
were  performed  for  each  flyer  material 
determine  the  input  pressure  shock  velocity 
particle  velocity  power  flux  and  energy  fluence. 
These inert simulations were performed at a range 
of  flyer  velocities  and  third  order  polynomials 
were  fit  to  the  resulting  data.  For  the  energy 
fluence  fits  an  additional  scaling 
included  which  accounted  for  flyer  thickness.  By 
performing  all  of  these  calculations  prior  to  the 
optimization  a  significant  reduction  in  required 
computational  time  for  each  parameter  set  was 
For these inert simulations the energy fluence 
was  calculated  as  the  integral  of  the  power  flux 
using  the  pressure  and  particle  velocity  timehistory data as follows 
where t0 is the TOA of the shock and tf is defined 
at some end state. For this work the end state was 
defined  as  the  time  at  which  the  power  flux 
experimentally observed critical power flux 3c. 
to  0.64  GWcm2  which 
Sustained Pulse Initiation Simulations 
Individual  simulations  of 
systems described previously were used to probe a 
given  reactive  models  ability 
sustained  pulse  behavior.  All  materials  were 
included  in  the  simulations  including  impact 
plates and backer plates. As mentioned previously 
the intersection of linear fits to the pre-detonation 
and  post-detonation  TOAs  shifted  by  the  gauge 
package  thicknesses  were  used  to  determine  the 
simulated  run  distance.  If  no  detonation  occurred 
by the end of the specimen the run distance was 
set  as  1.5  times  the  maximum  tracer  distance 
reached  by  the  shock.  All  TOAs  were  defined  as 
the  point  at  which  the  input  tracers  pressure 
increased above 2GPa. 
Special  treatment  had  to  be  used  in  order  to 
Vandersall6 reported the run distance for this shot 
as  greater  than  35.7mm  though  the  experimental 
specimen  length  was  20.43mm.  If  the  simulation 
of  this  shot  predicted  no  detonation  prior  to 
experimentally reported run distance of 35.7mm. 
the  run  distance  was  set 
As with thin pulse initiation pre-optimization 
inert simulations were performed to determine the 
input  pressure  shock  velocity  particle  velocity 
and  power  flux.  These  inert  simulations  were 
performed at a range of flyer velocities and third 
order polynomials were fit to the resulting data.  
For the sustained pulse experiments either the 
shock passes the regions of interest or the material 
transitions to a detonation prior to the input pulse 
being overtaken by the release wave. Therefore in 
order  to  calculate  the  energy  fluence  the  time 
duration was set to the length of time required for 
the material to run up to a detonation 
where  xrd  is  the  run  distance  and  Us  is  the  shock 
velocity determined from the inert simulations. 
Optimization Techniques 
The  optimization  techniques  utilized  here 
evolved  from  collaborative  work  between  AFRL 
and  University  of  Alabama-Birmingham7  and 
make  the  process  of  material  model  calibration 
more  systematic  through  the  use  of  nonlinear 
optimization techniques. Utilizing this framework 
the  techniques  developed  for  this  work  probed 
both the thin and sustained pulse regimes in order 
to derive optimal reactive model parameter values. 
optimization  software  package  LS-OPT8  driving 
commercially  available  from  Livermore  Software 
Technology Corporation. LS-OPT is designed for 
implementation  on  high  performance  computing 
clusters  and  can  be  easily  interfaced  with  a  wide 
variety of solver codes using a scripting interface 
technique. The optimization methodology utilized 
hydrocode  CTH.  LS-OPT 
here  was  metamodel-based  using  a  domain 
reduction  strategy.  The  hybrid  version  of  the 
adaptive  simulated  annealing  ASA  algorithm 
was selected. This is an annealing global stochastic 
metallurgical  annealing  process  and  the  hybrid 
version combines the global ASA optimizer with a 
local-gradient-based optimization algorithm. 
The FOMs for this work were defined in terms 
configurations  and  run  distances  for  sustained 
pulse  configurations.  As  shown  in  Figure  4  and 
Figure 5 the use of a percent error caused varying 
slopes  between  experimental  configurations.  To 
correct this a Scaled Magnitude Error SME was 
calculated as the magnitude differences scaled by 
the  maximum  experimental  value  for  the data  set 
e.g. Figure 4. For sustained pulse data the log of 
the scaled data was first taken due to the nature of 
the  Pop-plot  and  a  Log-Scaled  Magnitude  Error 
Figure 4 FOM values for thin pulse data 
Figure 5 FOM values for sustained pulse data 
LSME  was defined  as  the  magnitude difference 
of the log-scaled data e.g. Figure 5. 
the  optimized  simulation 
incorporated experimental error such that the FOM 
was  reduced  for  simulated  values  within  the 
experimental  bounds.  As  it  was  still  desired  to 
experimental value a parabolic function was used 
within  the  error  bars  and  a  linear  function  was 
used  outside  the  error  bars  see  Figure  4  and 
Figure  5.  The  SME  and  LSME  with  a  parabolic 
function  denoted  respectively  as  SMEP  and 
LSMEP  for  a  given  experimental  value  yexp  and 
experimental  range  limits  ymin  and  ymax  were 
formulated for a simulated value yi as follows 
where  E  is  the  value  of  the  parabolic  function  at 
the nearest error bar. The parabolic function term 
D  was  formulated  such  that  the  slopes  were 
identical at the experimental error bar 
Using these functions for each experiment the 
optimization  objective  was  defined  as 
distance to the target FOMs such that 
where n is the number of experiments considered 
and  w  is  a  weighting  term.  For  this  work  the 
weights were set identically to 1.  
The  number  of  parameter  sets  per  iteration 
was  set  to  200  times  the  number  of  parameters 
optimized.  Optimizations  utilized 
Department  of  Defense  High  Performance 
experiments  utilized  8  to  16  cores  requiring 
approximately  30  minutes  and  7  to  10  iterations 
were performed for each optimization. 
system  Pershing.  Each 
Table 3 Parameters optimized to FOM 
228.4094   3.5652x108 
 parameter not included in optimization 
performed in this work are presented in Figure 6 
where  each  data  point  represents  a  parameter  set 
probed  by  these  optimization  techniques.  These 
images  demonstrate  how  the  combined  FOM 
defined  in  11  results  in  a  compromise  between 
the two types of data. They also show that a given 
parameter set that was parameterized to sustained 
pulse data does not necessarily give a good fit to 
thin pulse data and vice versa.  
Surfaces  of  the  best  FOMs  for  the  varying 
parameters  are  given  in  Figure  7.  Not  all  of  the 
parameters  were  plotted  as  several  parameters 
gave  similarly  low  FOMs  for  a  broad  range  of 
values  e.g.  F  for  the  ARB  model.  Additional 
FOMs  will  be  required  in  order  to  properly 
constrain the optimization for these parameters. 
The  parameter  sets  optimized  to  the  defined 
FOM are given in Table 3. As shown in Figure 8 
and  Figure  9  all  optimizations  were  able  to  find 
improved parameter sets for sustained pulse data 
and all but the HVRB model were able to capture 
thin pulse data. The HVRB model was improved 
however  it  was  unable  to  capture  the  large 
increase in required velocity for the thinnest flyers. 
Figure 6 Thin pulse FOMs plotted against 
sustained pulse FOMs for each optimization.  
Figure 7 Surface of best possible solutions for 
select optimized parameters. 
demonstrated  a  poor  comparison  in  the  profile 
shapes. This could be due to the model and not the 
parameters  however  further  constraints  to  the 
FOM  used  could  benefit 
Several  parameters  were  seen  to  not  be 
constrained  by  the  FOMs  defined  in  this  work 
and  as  such  were  able  to  have  a  wide  range  of 
values  with  low  FOMs.  Additional  experiments 
will  need  to  be  added  to  the  FOMs  in  order  to 
properly constrain these variables. 
Comparing  various  unreacted  EOS 
crystalline TATB the best available model seems 
to  be  a  DFT-based  EOS20.  The  Mie-Grneisen 
values  from  the  CTH  database  for  TATB  and 
TATBSF  were  evaluated  and  found  to  be 
comparable  to  the  DFT  predictions  except  at 
higher  pressures  above  20  GPa  where  the 
database EOS is slightly stiffer. As the maximum 
input pressure for both the thin pulse and sustained 
pulse experiments was approximately 20 GPa this 
could be a potential cause of discrepancies for the 
highest  pressures.  In 
the  future  once  DFT 
calculations have been performed up to at least 50 
GPa the polynomial fit should be utilized for these 
Several parameters were unconstrained by the 
requiring  modified  or 
additional  FOMs  such  as  including  the  TOAs  of 
the  embedded  gauge  pressure  peaks  or  using  the 
sum  square  error  of  all  of  the  embedded  gauge 
TOAs rather just a single run distance value. Also 
attempts  to  correlate  some  of  the  parameters  to 
experimental  data  for  example  reaction  zone 
thickness  could  help  in  narrowing  down  the 
optimization possibilities. 
The  authors  would  like  to  thank  AFRL  the 
Joint  Fuze  Technology  Program  and  the  Joint 
Insensitive Munitions Technology Program for the 
funding  necessary  to  complete  this  work.  This 
distribution unlimited 96ABW-2014-0162. 
Figure 8 Comparison of sustained pulse 
experimental data to optimized model predictions
Figure 9 Comparison of thin pulse experimental 
data to optimized model predictions 
Summary and Conclusions 
New  parameter  sets  for  Ultra-Fine  TATB 
were  developed  for  the  CTH  reactive  models 
ARB  HVRB  and  IGRB  utilizing  LS-OPT. 
These parameters were optimized to experimental 
data  defining  the  modified  HJI  criterion  for  both 
thin  pulse  and  sustained  pulse.  Comparisons  of 
results  from  the  optimized  parameters  to  the 
experimental  data  were  favorable.  The  optimized 
models  can  better  reproduce  both  the  UF-TATB 
thin  pulse  initiation  threshold  behavior  and  the 
run-to-detonation distance for a sustained pulse. 
Though these models are now able to replicate 
sustained  pulse  run  distances  a  comparison 
against experimental gauge data6 not shown here 
limited  pulse  experiments  and Quantifying the Effect of Rate-Dependent Plasticity of HMX Particles on the 
Ignition Sensitivity of PBXs 
D. Barrett Hardin and Min Zhou 
The George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering 
 Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta GA USA 
Abstract. The effect of viscoplastic deformation of HMX on the ignition sensitivity of 
two-phase  PBX  specimens  is  analyzed.  A  micromechanical  Cohesive  Finite  Element 
method  is  utilized  to  model  the  mechanical  and  thermal  response  of  PBXs  to  piston 
impact  velocities  from  100  to  200  ms.  The  micromechanical  calculations  are  then 
analyzed to determine the time required to generate a critical hotspot for each specimen. 
As  expected  the  results  show  that  the  time  to  criticality  varies  with  microstructural 
geometry for a given packing fraction and piston velocity.  A Weibull distribution is used 
to quantify the distribution of times to criticality providing a functional representation of 
the likelihood of initiation prior to a given time. Three 2 major effects of viscoplastic 
deformation in the HMX are that viscoplastic deformation 1 reduces the threshold time 
to criticality for all loading conditions 2 increases the range of potential initiation times 
and 3 increases the effect of changes in HMX loading fraction. The results indicate that 
the  initiation  sensitivity  in  HMX  capable  of  viscoplasticity  is  influenced  by  the 
microstructure both packing fraction and geometric organization to a much larger degree 
than PBX specimens with elastic HMX. 
The  process  of  formulating  a  new  energetic 
composite  is  a  long  expensive  process  that  is 
heavily  reliant  on  years  of  experience  and 
extensive experimental testing. One issue standing 
in  the  path  of  a  more  streamlined  process  is  a 
fundamental  lack  of  understanding  of  how  a 
formulation will respond to mechanical insult such 
as  heating  dragging  or  dropping  1.  This  work 
like  previous  papers  by  the  authors  2  3 
investigates  the  ignition  sensitivity  of  polymer 
bonded  explosives  PBXs  by  modeling 
composite  material 
level.  The  results  from  many 
instantiations  with 
similar  microstructural 
descriptors are then analyzed in order to obtain a 
statistical representation of the initiation sensitivity 
of the material system. We build upon the work of 
Barua  et  al.  3  by  incorporating  an  elasticviscoplastic  mechanical  description  of  the  HMX 
particles as suggested by Menikoff and Sewell 4. 
Previous  work  by  Panchadhara  and  Gonthier  5 
quantifies the partitioning of dissipated energy in a 
dynamic  granular  compaction  event  into  bulk 
plasticity  and  surface  intergranular  dissipation 
mechanisms.  They  find  that  intergranular  friction 
is  the  cause  of  the  most  significant  energy 
localization  events  but  do  not  consider  what 
effect if any that the viscoplastic deformation had 
on  the  location  and  time  to  formation  of  those 
hotspots.  Quantifying 
viscoplasticity  on  threshold  time  to  initiation  the 
mean time to initiation and the range of initiation 
times  specifically  delineates 
viscoplasticity  in  HMX  has  on  the  initiation 
sensitivity of PBX. 
Computational Framework 
The  computational  framework  used  in  this 
paper  to  investigate  ignition  sensitivity  utilizes  a 
technique  which  combines  
deterministic  micromechanical  simulations  and  a 
stochastic treatment of the results. The first step is 
analyzing the thermal and mechanical response of 
a  2-phase  HMX  and  binder  PBX  to  impact 
loading.  A  fully  dynamic  2D  cohesive  finite 
element  method  CFEM  is  used  to  characterize 
the  distribution  of  mechanically  induced  hotspots 
due  to  the  combined  effect  of  plasticity  fracture 
friction and thermal diffusion. The Estane binder 
is modeled using a viscoelastic material definition 
6 and the HMX particles are modeled using an 
inert viscoplastic material model to capture the rate 
sensitive  plastic  behavior  of  HMX  noted 
continuously  embedded  cohesive  finite  elements 
allow for specimen damage in the form of binder 
tearing  particle  debonding  and 
fracture.  Once  damage  occurs  we  account  for 
frictional  sliding  along  created  surfaces  using 
Coulomb  friction.  Each  simulation  results  in 
heterogeneous  evolving  temperature  and  stress 
fields for the entire specimen as well as the time 
to criticality tc that is used to evaluate the effect 
of  material  stochasticity  using  a  probabilistic 
analysis.  For  this  analysis  tc  is  measured  as  the 
time from the beginning of the impact event to the 
time  at  which  the  domain  has  a  hotspot  with 
requisite size and temperature to indicate ignition 
in the analysis due to Tarver et al. 8. In order to 
obtain  a  significant  number  of  data  points  for  a 
stochastic analysis a set of 20 statistically similar 
microstructures  is  tested  for  each  microstructural 
The CFEM calculations focus on determining 
the effect of plasticity in the HMX particles on the 
ignition sensitivity of PBX. This effect is analyzed 
over a range of piston velocities 
and  grain  volume  fraction  
HMX  particles  have  a  mean  particle  size  of  235 
250  and  264  m  for  grain  volume  fractions  of 
0.72  0.81  and  0.90  respectively.  The  grain 
in  each  specimen  are  simple 
regions  generated  by  a  Voronoi 
tessellation.  The  binder  phase  is  assumed  to  be 
distributed evenly causing binder thicknesses that 
are constant function of grain volume fraction. Fig 
1  shows  the  size  and  loading  conditions  of  a 
instantiation  having  a  packing 
density of 0.81. Each specimen is discretized into 
200000  finite  elements.  The  specimens  are 
sufficiently  long  to  ensure  that  the  response 
influence  from  the  wave  reflection  at  the  far 
is  a  single  wave 
Fig 1. Loading configuration for all simulations in 
the  current  study.  The  microstructure  here  is  one 
of  the  instantiations  containing  a  solids  loading 
Probabilistic Ignition Sensitivity 
The second step of our analysis uses the set of 
all tc obtained from the CFEM calculations of each 
material  description  to  compute  the  cumulative 
probability  distribution  for  time  to  criticality  of  a 
given microstructure set. This distribution is fitted 
to the Weibull function described by Equation 1. 
The  parameters  of  the  Weibull  function  are 
used  as  measures  of  ignition  sensitivity  that  can 
then  be  related  to  the  microstructural  attributes 
providing  a  relationship  between  the  ignition 
sensitivity and microstructure conditions of PBXs. 
This statistical representation is used to determine 
the sensitivity metrics including the threshold time 
to criticality t0 and the median time to criticality 
t50 and the range of expected times to criticality 
Elastic-Viscoplastic Relation for HMX 
A visco-plastic constitutive relation is utilized 
to describe the mechanical properties of the HMX 
particles.  The  model  described  briefly  below  is 
presented in detail in Zhou 9. This allows us to 
model the plastic flow that has been seen to occur 
in  HMX  crystals  under  dynamic 
conditions.  For  elastic-plastic  flow  the  basic 
kinematic assumption is 
where Fe and Fp are the elastic and plastic portions 
of the deformation gradient respectively. The rate 
of  deformation  D  and  the  spin    are  the 
symmetric and anti-symmetric parts of the velocity 
gradient cid1780cid4662cid1780cid2879cid2869.  The  deformation  rate  and  spin 
can  be  decomposed  into  their  elastic  and  plastic 
At  this  point  we  restrict  our  attention  to  the 
case  of  small  elastic  strains  and  thermo-elastic 
coupling is ignored such that the elastic moduli are 
where     is  the  Jaumann  rate  of  Kirchhoff  stress 
and L is the tensor of elastic moduli. For isotropic 
temperature.  Under 
second  order  identity  tensor  and  AB    denotes 
where  E  is  the  Youngs  modulus  v  is  Poissons 
ratio I is the fourth order identity tensor I is the 
the tensor product.  
For  an  isotropically  hardening  viscoplastic 
solid Dp is given by 
where   is the equivalent plastic strain rate and  
The viscoplastic response of the HMX will be 
validated  against  available  experimental  data  and 
is characterized by the following equations 
 is the equivalent plastic strain 
0  and  m  are reference strain rates m and a are 
rate  sensitivity  parameters  for  strain  rates  below 
103  s-1  and  above  104  s-1  respectively 
0 is a reference strain N 
quasi-static yield stress 
is the strain hardening exponent T0 is the reference 
temperature  and    and    are  thermal  softening 
T   represents  the 
parameters.  The  function 
response  at  ambient 
quasi-static  stress-strain 
For  each  of  the  microstructural  instantiations 
considered 20 each for HMX packing fractions of 
0.72  0.81  and  0.90  a  geometrically  identical 
specimen  is  loaded  with  piston  velocities  of  100 
150  and  200  ms.  In  order  to  distinguish  the 
elastic-viscoplastic 
deformation in the HMX all components are held 
velocity  microstructural 
geometry and packing fraction and the results are 
the  specimens  containing 
elastic HMX and those having elastic-viscoplastic 
Effect of Elastic-Viscoplastic Behavior in HMX 
elastic-viscoplastic 
deformation  in  HMX  has  three  3  significant 
effects on the ignition sensitivity behavior of PBX. 
1  Viscoplastic  deformation  in  the  HMX  phase 
induces  a  reduction  in  time  to  criticality.  2  The 
spread  of  critical  times  to  ignition  increases  with 
viscoplasticity.  3  Viscoplasticity  intensifies  the 
effect  of  packing  fraction  on  time  to  criticality. 
Effect  3  indicates  that  the  elastic-viscoplastic 
material behavior in the HMX is more effective at 
distinguishing between microstructures containing 
different amounts of HMX. 
Fig  2.  Probability  distributions  of  the  time  to  criticality  for  microstructures  with  different  grain  volume 
fractions   0.720.90 HMX material behaviors elastic and elastic-viscoplastic and piston velocities  
 The vertical dashed lines in Fig 2 correspond 
to  the  earliest  time  for  which  any  microstructure 
contains  a  critical  hotspot  1.38  s  occurring  in 
microstructure  with  0.81  packing  fraction  and  a 
piston velocity of 150 ms. This figure shows that 
the microstructures with elastic-viscoplastic HMX 
not only have earlier ignition threshold times than 
the  purely  elastic  microstructures  but 
viscoplastic  specimens  also  tend  to  have  later 
maximum ignition times. This effect indicates that 
the  viscoplastic  deformation  magnifies  the  effect 
of  microstructure  on  the  ignition  sensitivity  in 
PBX specimens. Fig 2 also indicates that the HMX 
packing  fraction  can  alter  the  influence  of  piston 
velocity  on  initiation  probability.  This  is  most 
clearly seen in the initiation probability curve for a 
150  ms  piston  velocity  in  d-f.  For  an  HMX 
fraction  of  0.90  f  there  is  very  little  difference 
between  the  initiation  response  times  for  piston 
velocities  of  150  and  200  ms.  However  as  the 
fraction  of  HMX  decreases  the  effect  of  piston 
velocity  becomes  more  pronounced. 
following  sections  each  of  the  parameters  in  the 
Weibull  distribution  functions  are  analyzed  as 
metrics of the effect of viscoplastic deformation on 
the initiation sensitivity of the specimens. 
Effect of Piston Velocity on Threshold Time t0 
The threshold time to ignition t0 is affected 
by  both  the  piston  velocity  and  the  material 
behavior of the HMX. Fig 3 shows that the higher 
piston velocities lead to reduced effect of packing 
fraction  on  the  ignition  response.  For  all  packing 
fractions  viscoplasticity  in  the  HMX  lowers  the 
initiation  threshold  by  1.2    1.8  s  for  a  piston 
velocity of 100 ms and 1.1 s for 200 ms. 
Fig  3.  The  effect  of  HMX  material  behavior 
elastic  and  elastic-viscoplastic  on  t0  for  piston 
speeds from 100  200 ms and packing fractions 
of 0.72 0.81 and 0.90. 
Effect of Microstructure on t50 
Effect of Microstructure on trange 
The range of probable ignition times trange is 
defined  here  as  the  time  between  the  ignition 
probability of ignition reaches 99. The variation 
in trange due to material type and piston velocity is 
shown in Fig. 5. This measure is related to  but 
provides  a  physical  frame  of  reference  for  the 
results where  is a wholly abstract representation. 
trange is between 42 and 225  higher in specimens 
with viscoplastic HMX. Similarly to t0 and t50 the 
effect  of  packing  fraction  is  increased  in  the 
viscoplastic  specimens  indicating  an  increased 
microstructural influence. 
Fig.  4.  The  effect  of  HMX  material  behavior 
elastic  and  elastic-viscoplastic  on  t50  for  piston 
speeds from 100  200 ms and packing fractions 
of 0.72 0.81 and 0.90. 
ignition  sensitivity 
For Weibull distributions of the form used in 
this work t50 is defined as the time for which the 
probability that a randomly selected specimen has 
ignited  is  0.5  the  mean  ignition  time.  As  a 
convenient than t0 for measuring and representing 
the  behavior  of  the  entire  set  of  microstructures. 
Because the mean time to ignition is not sensitive 
to  the  extreme  ignition  cases  it  requires  fewer 
microstructural  instantiations  to  reliably  obtain. 
The  data  in  Fig.  4  show  that  the  mean  time  to 
ignition  decreases  monotonically  as  a  function  of 
piston velocity. Specimens with viscoplastic HMX 
generally  have  lower  mean  critical  ignition  times 
the  corresponding  microstructures  with 
elastically deforming HMX. The one exception is  
  0.72. For this packing fraction the viscoplastic 
specimens  are  slower  to  initiate  at  low  velocities 
and faster at high velocities. 
Fig.  5.  The  effect  of  HMX  material  behavior 
elastic and elastic-viscoplastic on trange for piston 
speeds from 100  200 ms and packing fractions 
of 0.72 0.81 and 0.90. 
been fit to a line solid black the slope of which 
corresponds to the hotspot generation rate for this 
set  of  microstructures  and  the  cutoff  time  is  the 
time corresponding to zero hotspots. Fig 7 shows 
the hotspot generation rate red triangles and the 
cutoff  time  blue  squares  as  a  function of  piston 
In order to develop a predictive model for the 
behavior  of  PBXs  under  dynamic  loads  it  is 
necessary  to  characterize  the  hotspot  generation 
rate  per  unit  area  of  impacted  specimen.  To 
approximate  a  large  specimen  the  twenty  20 
specimens with 0.81 packing fraction of HMX are 
assumed  to  be  a  single  wide  specimen  and  a 
hotspot  is  defined  as  a  distinct  geometric  region 
with  a  temperature  in  excess  of  700  K.  Fig.  6 
shows the evolution of the number of hotspots per 
total  impacted  width  orange  squares  for  the 
whole set of specimens. 
Fig  7.  Hotspot  generation  rate  red  triangles  and 
cutoff  time  blue  squares  as  a  function of  piston 
velocity  for  microstructures  with  a  packing 
fraction of 0.81 and elastic-viscoplastic HMX. 
Fig. 6. Total number of hotspots per mm of impact 
face length in the 20 specimen set having elasticviscoplastic HMX    0.81   and 150 ms piston 
speed.  The  slope  of  the  solid  black  line  is  the 
hotspot  generation  rate  for  this  set  and  the 
intersection of the black line with the x-axis is the 
delay time to initiation. 
The  evolution  of  the  number  density  of 
hotspots in Fig. 6 can be split into two 2 distinct 
regions 1 the initial ramp from 0 to 2 s 2 the 
linear  region  higher  than  2  s.  Region  1  is  of 
significance  in  describing  the  earliest  critical 
initiation  sites  in  the  large  composite  specimen. 
This  is  an  area  of  intense  interest  because  it 
concerns  the  worst  case  scenario  for  this  given 
material  set.  However 
restricted to region 2 which is characterized by a 
nearly  constant  hotspot  generation  rate  for  each 
microstructural  sample  set.  The  significance  of 
homogenized rate of hotspot generation rather than 
the earliest observed critical event. This region has 
the  current  focus 
to  hotspots  generated  solely  by 
The  cutoff  time  as  a  function  of  piston 
velocity in Fig 7 indicates that a minimum cutoff 
time  exists  at  1.65  s.  This  apparent  threshold 
combined  effects  of  plasticity  and  frictional 
heating.  This  cutoff  time  does  not  represent  the 
minimum  ignition  time  rather  it  is  a  minimum 
time for which the PBX specimens are generating 
hotspots  at  a  steady  rate.  Critical  heating  in  this 
microstructural  and 
primarily  due  to  intragranular  friction.  Therefore 
this  cutoff  time  indicates  a  minimum  time  scale 
necessary for frictional heating to localize enough 
energy to reach criticality.  
loading  configuration 
Due to the uncertainty involved in predicting 
the initiation sensitivity of heterogeneous energetic 
individual  mechanisms  be 
understood and quantified. To that end the effect 
of  viscoplastic  deformation  on 
sensitivity  has  been  isolated  from  competing  and 
complimentary dissipation mechanisms by running 
identical micromechanical simulations with elastic Computer Simulations to Study the Effects of Explosive Energetic and Constitutive 
Properties on the Deflagration-to-Detonation Transition DDT 
John E. Reaugh John P. Curtis and Mary-Ann Maheswaran 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore CA 94550 USA 
Atomic Weapons Establishment 
Aldermaston Reading Berkshire RG7 4PR UK 
      Abstract.  The  HERMES  model  High  Explosive  Response  to  MEchanical  Stimulus 
was  developed  to  describe  deformation  ignition  and  post-ignition  pressure  build-up 
which  can  occur  when  explosive  assemblies  are  subjected 
insufficiently  strong  to  develop  prompt  detonation.  We  have  used  the  model  to  describe 
HEVR  High  Explosive Violent Response that can occur in Steven or spigot intrusion tests. 
We  have  augmented  the  HERMES  model  by  adding  a  modified  CREST  Computational 
Reaction  Evolution  dependent  on  Entropy  S  and  Time  detonation  model.  We  have 
in  an  experimental 
configuration  comprising  an  explosive  confined  in  a  tube  and  ignited  at  one  of  the  two 
closed  ends.  We  assess  the  quantitative  effects  of  explosive  energetic  and  constitutive 
properties  and  of  tube geometry and strength on the location of the detonation transition. 
We first examine the effect of changing the scale size of the DDT test geometry for material 
with  fixed  particle  size  and  also  with  scaled  particle  size  including  the  influence  of 
porosity.  We  then  examine  by  computer  simulation  the  potential  of  a  large  charge  to  DDT 
following an assumed ignition. 
the  combined  model 
In recent years there has been substantial progress  on  modelling  DDT.  Saenz  and  Stewart1  
comment that macroscale DDT in explosive powders has well-defined characteristics and is amenable  to  description  by  continuum  models  that  in 
some sense average over the microstructure. They 
note that the challenge is to keep the model simple 
enough to enable computation to be undertaken in 
practical  timescales  while  retaining  the  essential 
A range of methods has been deployed in an 
attempt to address this challenge. Early work was 
undertaken  by  Verbeek  and  van  der  Steen2  who 
examined a model based on convective and compressive  burning  utilising  a  temperature-based 
cut-off model and no shock initiation model. The 
authors  acknowledged  that  their  one-dimensional 
model was not in good agreement with experiment 
and suggested tube expansion and the inadequacy 
of the ignition model as possible reasons for this. 
Kuo et al.3 and then Baer and Nunziato4 solved the 
conservation  equations  of  mass  momentum  and 
energy for each phase with an additional equation 
describing  the  volume  fraction  evolution.  The 
complexity  of  such  models  with  the  associated 
demand on computational resources has since led 
to a series of simplified formulations. 
Bdzil and Son5 explored simplified phase exchange  laws.  Kapila et  al.6  considered  systematic 
asymptotic  reductions  in  the  Baer  and  Nunziato 
model4  including  the  BKS  model.  These  showed 
that there is a very rapid adjustment of the velocities in each phase to the same velocity suggesting 
that  making  the  simplification  of  a  multi-phase 
single velocity model may suffice to capture DDT 
phenomena  accurately  at  the  macroscopic  scale. 
Xu  and  Stewart7  introduced  a  three-phase  model 
solid  void  and  gas  XS.  Stewart  Prasad  and 
Asay8 SPA formulated a model in terms of product-reactant  mixture  quantities  and  two  internal 
state  variables  representing  reaction  and  compaction  with  an  equation  of  state  for  the  porous  explosive  using  the  P-  model  of  Herrmann9  and 
Carrol and Holt10. Saenz and Stewart1 modified the 
SPA model incorporating some features of the XS 
model  such  as  a  pressure  cut-off  function  designed to suppress numerical instabilities resulting 
from the fast reaction rate. 
Xu and Stewart7 showed that both the XS and 
SPA  models  appeared  able  to  capture  the  U 
shaped  curves  for  the  distance  to  detonation  as  a 
function  of  packing  density  as  reported  by 
Luebcke et al.1112 better than the BKS model did. 
We  apply  our  model  to  both  a  typical  DDT 
test  configuration  and  to  unconfined  but  large 
charges  and  report  the  effect  of  various  parameters  which  affect  the  explosive  mechanical  and 
energetic response on DDT. 
Description of the HERMES model 
We developed the HERMES model High Explosive Response to MEchanical Stimulus to describe  deformation  ignition  and  post-ignition 
pressure  build-up  which  can  occur  when  explosive assemblies are subjected to impacts. We have 
used the model to describe HEVR High Explosive 
Violent  Response  that  can  occur  in  Steven  or 
spigot intrusion tests. In such tests the mechanical 
insult is not strong enough to induce prompt detonation. Instead above some threshold velocity that 
depends  on  the  explosive  properties  and  test  geometry  there  is  ignition  followed  by  pressure 
build-up.  The  confinement  is  ruptured  but  not 
shattered.  A  substantial  fraction  of  the  original 
explosive  mass  is  left  unreacted.13  We  have  also 
applied HERMES to other test geometries which 
are designed to study the transition from deflagration to detonation14. These tests start with a deliberate localized ignition at one end of a column of 
porous  permeable  explosive  surrounded  by  mechanical confinement. In some cases the pressure 
build-up after ignition can lead to a detonation that 
starts partway down the column at some distance 
from the ignition region. In other cases the result 
is  more  like  an  HEVR  with  confinement  rupture 
and unreacted explosive remaining.  
HERMES  is  a  multi-species  single-velocity 
description of reacting explosive. It has been embedded in Livermore Softwares LS-DYNA15 and 
Lawrence  Livermore  National  Laboratorys 
ALE3D16 computer simulation programs as a userdefined material UMAT. To permit use within an 
ALE  framework  the  model  also  incorporates  a 
post-advection  routine.  This  routine  initializes  internal  history  variables  when  advection  transports  HERMES  material  into  a  new  domain  for 
multi-processor  simulations  readjusts  the  stress 
deviator tensor to the yield surface enforces pressure  equilibrium  and  ensures  consistency  of  the 
partition  of  energy  among  the  species.  The  three 
species  of  the  HERMES  model  are  the  explosive 
product gas unreacted but isolated solid particles 
and  the  skeleton  matrix  of  solid  that  supports 
shear  stress  and  resists  compaction.  The  species 
are  in  pressure  equilibrium  but  not  temperature 
equilibrium. This is consistent with our picture of 
the hot gas products separated from the unreacted 
solid  by  a  thin  flame  front.  Instead  the  energy 
partition  is  determined  by  the  method  described 
by1718  and  illustrated  by19.  The  energy  of  plastic 
work  compaction  and  adiabatic  compression  is 
given to the solid and the remainder given to the 
gas. Pressure equilibrium is given by 
where the subscript s is the solid g is the gas and 
m is the matrix stress. This matrix stress is not the 
force per superficial area exerted by a porous solid 
but rather the force per solid area. The two stresses 
are  proportional  by  the  area  fraction  of  the  solid. 
Throughout the model we have assumed that the 
volume  and  area  fractions  of  a  species  are  equal. 
The equation of state of the gas is a table calculated  with  Cheetah  LLNLs  thermo-chemical  equilibrium code.20 The solid equation of state has the 
where the reference state is taken to be the adiabat 
from  room  temperature  and  pressure.  The  matrix 
pressure  below  a  specified  crush  pressure  has 
Herrmanns P- form910 and uses the solid equation  of  state  for  high-pressure.  The  matrix  resistance  to  crush  and  shear  depends  only  on  the 
matrix stress not the total stress. This is similar to 
the effective stress used in soil mechanics for water-saturated soils. The shear strength of the solid 
is borne by the matrix. If the expansion exceeds a 
specified maximum value the matrix pressure and 
shear  strength  are  zero.  The  mixture  is  then  considered  to  be  a  gas  at  pressure  equilibrium  with 
non-interacting  particles  of  unreacted  explosive. 
The shear strength depends on pressure porosity 
strain  and  strain-rate  using  a  formulation  developed  for  calculating  the  resistance  of  concrete  to 
high-velocity impact21. The strain-rate strain hardening and porosity damage softening are fitted to 
uniaxial stress tests using both quasi-static loading 
and  dynamic  loading  from  Split  Hopkinson  Pressure  Bars.  The  pressure  dependence  is  fitted  to 
quasi-static  triaxial  stress  tests.  The  model  fit  to 
such data is illustrated in13. In general there are no 
test data for the combination of high rate loading 
with confining stress although the model provides 
values for that case. The yield stress Y is given by 
where the subscripts i and r refer to the intact and 
residual  strength    is  plastic  strain  and    is  porosity.  The  function  R  is  the  strain-rate  dependence T is the confining stress dependence H is the 
strain hardening and D is the damage strain softening. Here Y0 a and b are parameters. By introducing a pressure-dependent plastic potential porosity increases with plastic shear strain. We have 
Ignition and Burning 
found  no  generally  applicable  theory  to  evaluate 
the shear stress dependence over a wide range of 
initial porosity. As a result we must rely on data at 
or  near  the  porosity  of  interest.  In  general  such 
data are at best sparse as functions of porosity and 
frequently  not  available  at  all.  We  present  below 
the results of simulations that indicate the sensitivity of the explosive response to some of these unmeasured parameters. 
In  HERMES  ignition  may  either  be  set  at  a 
pre-determined location as would be the case for 
DDT-specific  test  geometries  or  developed  as  a 
result of shear localization. In this phenomenological model of ignition from mechanical insult we 
assume  that  temperature  which  is  the  chemical 
basis for the onset of reaction is localized where 
the shear strains are localized. We do not wish to 
resolve the temperature gradient nor calculate the 
reaction  chemistry  at  that  length  scale.  Although 
we account for initial temperature in the response 
by  an  equivalence  of  temperature  increase  and 
strain-rate  decrease  typically  10  K  per  decade 
we do not permit thermal softening during the deformation. In this way when friction between the 
explosive and its confinement tends to localize the 
shear strain there the strain-rate and pressure dependencies of the shear strength result in a calculated  boundary  layer  containing  most  of  the 
shear  strain  with  typical  thickness  0.5  mm.  This 
results  in  resolution  requirements  similar  to  that 
needed  for  reactive  flow  calculations  of  detonation.  If  instead  we  sought  to  resolve  the  shear 
bands  in  order  to  calculate  the  chemical  reaction 
rates the mesh requirements would be sub-micron. 
Following  ignition  hot  product  gas  can  diffuse into the surrounding damaged explosive and 
ignite  the  damaged  surfaces.  Tests  in  the  LLNL 
high-pressure strand burner on porous permeable 
powder  and  thermally  damaged  explosives  have 
shown ignition front advance speeds of 103 to 105 
mms. The sound speed in flame products is calculated to be a few times 105 mms. In contrast the 
laminar  burn  speed  for  a  flame  moving  into  an 
undamaged explosive is about 102 mms and linearly pressure dependent. If the particles are small 
the  large  surface  area  permits  the  mass-burning 
rate to keep pace with the ignition front so there is 
little  time  lag  between  arrival  of  the  front  and 
complete burn up behind the front. If the particles 
are large however there can be significant lag. 
HERMES  calculates  the  surface  area  of  the 
fragments as a function of the local plastic strain13. 
In  effect  this  is  a  comminution  model  so  that 
some of the plastic work done on the explosive is 
used  to  create  surface  area.  Our  empirical  model 
can be calibrated with shotgun tests where small 
cylinders  of  explosive  are  fired  at  a  steel  plate 
with  low  enough velocity  that  the  explosive  does 
not  ignite.  The  fragments  are  collected.  The  surface  area  for  a  given  velocity  is  calculated  by 
comparing the mass-burning rate of the fragments 
with the measured laminar burn speed. Computer 
simulations of the impacts are used to correlate the 
plastic strain with the observed surface area. 
At  present  HERMES  uses 
the  oversimplification  of  a  single  constant  velocity  of  an 
ignition front but otherwise does not account for 
the diffusion of gas away from sites of established 
burning.  In  ALE3D  this  burn  front  is  calculated 
with a level set method. In LS DYNA the arrival 
time  of  a  burn  front  is  recalculated  for  each  element by the line of sight distance when new elements  satisfy  the  ignition  criterion.  For  DDTspecific  tests  the  initial  conditions  are  a  uniform 
porosity and permeability. For this case the use of 
a  single  velocity  value  seems  to  be  adequate.  In 
situations where explosive is damaged but not uniformly so the use of a single velocity is not accurate. This type of ignition front does not penetrate 
into undamaged explosive. It has been our custom 
in such cases to use an ignition front velocity appropriate  to  the  damaged  material.  Although  this 
choice starts the burn in undamaged regions far too 
early the resulting mass burn rate is small because 
the undamaged region has a small or zero specific surface area.  
Simultaneously  with  the  mass-burning  rate 
calculated from subsonic burn in damaged explosive  described  above  we  employ  a  subset  of  the 
Computational  Reaction  Evolution  dependent  on 
entropy  S  and  Time  model  CREST22.  In 
CREST the reaction rate is dependent on a function of the entropy density. In this way the CREST 
model can intrinsically distinguish the burning rate 
associated  with  a  slow  isentropic  pressure  rise 
from the burning rate associated with a shock having the same peak pressure. In the original developments  of  CREST  the  explosive  was  treated  as 
strengthless.  Porous  explosive  exhibited  no  resistance to compaction snowplow model. In our 
implementation there is irreversible work done in 
both  compaction  and  in  shear.  Refitting  the 
CREST parameters to match results from Shock to 
Detonation  Transition  SDT  experiments  can 
compensate for our calculation of the plastic work 
in  compaction  shocks.  The  plastic  work  done  in 
both  slow  compaction  and  slow  shear  however 
can  enhance  the  reaction  rates  in  an  unintended 
way. While we are investigating these effects we 
have implemented a user-option not to incorporate 
plastic work in the calculation of the reaction rates. 
We have not yet resolved how to treat the contribution  to  entropy  from  irreversible  deformation 
that is not associated with a shock. 
The  same  CREST  parameters  have  been 
shown to be accurate for densities from 90 theoretical  maximum  density  TMD  to  the  nominal 
97-98 for plastic bonded explosives23. However 
they  have  been  found  inadequate  at  85  TMD14 
and  lower24.  At present  we  are  uncertain whether 
this  inadequacy  is  our  application  to granular  explosives rather then PBX. Our fits of CREST parameters  to  the  limited  data  available  for  SDT  in 
porous explosives are not unique. It remains possible that a single parameter set informed by multiple gauge records could be accurate. We have not 
Variations of the DDT test geometry 
There are several variants of the test apparatus 
for  DDT  assessment  including  the  ignition  method  confinement  data  taken  to  assess  DDT  and 
size. For some of the tests the ignition system for 
DDT was a shock driven by a moving piston25. In 
our view that is more akin to SDT than DDT. For 
ignition  methods  without  a  piston  the  ignition 
system  can  either  be  gas  producing  or  not.  Gasproducing ignitions26 result in a more-or-less rapid 
pressure  rise.  In  the  RARDE  tube  test27  this  results in damage to the full density explosive sample. Hot gas from the igniter may stream not only 
through the broken explosive but also around the 
periphery of the explosive igniting the broken material28. A violent response in such a test can be the 
result  of  a  combination  of  explosive  frangibility 
how much surface area is made and laminar burn 
speed what is the resulting mass burn rate. Other 
tests use a thermite reaction to create high temperature but without substantial amounts of gas29. In 
principle  such  an  ignition  system  presents  fewer 
uncertainties in the initial condition.  
Confinement  of  the  DDT  test  is  frequently  a 
steel  tube  with  steel  end  caps.    In  some  cases 
transparent tubes have been used to facilitate visual observation of gas products andor light output. 
These are generally at the expense of confinement. 
Reducing  confinement  pushes  the  transition  to 
detonation  farther  away  from  the  ignition  site.  In 
the extreme case the transition does not occur or 
perhaps a noticeable change of reaction violence in 
the vicinity of the far end cap is observed. In our 
simulations we observe that over a limited range 
halving  the  wall  thickness  results  in  a  transition 
location  similar  to  the  one  that  occurs  with  the 
same wall thickness but with half the strength. 
Various methods have been used to assess the 
location of the DDT transition. Simplest to implement  is  to  gather  the  resulting  fragments  of  the 
steel  confinement  and  noting  the  location  of  the 
transition  by  a  sudden  change  in  the  number  of 
fragments per unit length of tube or the characteristic appearance of steel fragments that have been 
subjected to grazing detonations rather than more 
modest  pressure  rise.  Alternatively  recording  the 
light output with a streak camera looking at either 
the transparent tube or a transparent window in the 
steel  confinement  can  show  the  intersection  of 
light intensity progressing at the detonation speed 
appropriate for the initial porosity of the HE with 
a  start-up  region  near  the  igniter  where  the  progress is much slower. Strain gauges or break wires 
spaced  at  intervals  along  the  tube  can  be  used  to 
record  the  arrival  of  a wave  progressing with  the 
detonation speed and the slower start-up. There is 
a  systematic  offset  caused  by  the  response  of  a 
thick  walled  tube  which  can  be  calculated  and 
accounted for in the final interpretation of the data. 
Time of arrival pins or piezoelectric pins mounted in the confinement tube wall at regular intervals 
can also be used to infer the transition location. 
The confinement tube inner diameter can also 
play a role. The DDT tube is generally filled with 
Simulations of the DDT test 
powder or broken HE with uniform porosity. If the 
fragment  size  is  too  large  a  fraction  of  the  inner 
diameter  of  the  tube  HEwall  interactions  will 
likely play a significant role. At the very least this 
condition introduces a radial distribution of porosity  which  will  introduce  a  radial  distribution  of 
response. As a result the transition inferred from 
data collected at or near the wall may not be representative of the bulk response.  
We  chose  one  of  the  DDT  test  variants30  for 
our  baseline.  The  confinement  tube  is  mild  steel 
for which we used properties of 1018 alloy steel 
25 mm inside diameter and 25 mm wall thickness 
340  mm  long.  The  tube  is  held  between  12  mm 
thick  steel  end  caps which  in  the  experiment  are 
bolted.  In  our  simulations  we  record  the  radial 
stress in wall elements adjacent to the explosive at 
10 mm axial intervals. Numerical derivative of the 
arrival  time  gives  the  local  propagation  velocity. 
We record the detonation transition point as being 
the  axial  location  where  the  propagation  speed 
reaches 95 of the steady detonation velocity for 
the initial porosity. 
Our  axisymmetric  simulations  used  a  thin 
steel  outer  tube  to  represent  the  restraint  of  the 
four bolts although in our simulations the bolts 
were  not  pre-stressed.  For  those  experiments  the 
igniter was an essentially gasless thermite system. 
The  tube  was  instrumented  with  three  pairs  of 
strain gauges but the principal diagnostic was the 
appearance  of  the  tube  fragments.  Their  experiments  used  LX04  molding  powder  beads  85 
HMX  by  weight  15  Viton  binder  at  different 
starting densities. 
The particle size distribution for that molding 
powder  has  been  recently  measured31.  It  has  a 
mean  diameter  Dm  of  2.4  mm.  The  distribution 
given by plotting the fractional mass retained on a 
sieve as a function of the log of the nominal sieve 
size is approximately Gaussian log-normal distribution.  The  particle  sizes  at  half  the  maximum 
value  are  about  1.6  and  3.4  mm.  The  HERMES 
model describes the burn of a particle size distribution by a characteristic diameter and a power-law. 
For the burn of monodisperse spheres the burning 
where  is the mass fraction v is the laminar burn 
speed SV is the surface area per unit volume and 
p  takes  the value  23. We  examined  a  number  of 
different log normal distributions which have different values of R where the particle sizes at half 
maximum are DmR and DmR. For the LX04 molding  powder  beads  described  above  R  takes  the 
value  1.45  The  surface  to  volume  ratio  SV  is 
6Dm for a single sphere R  1 and takes a larger 
value for values of R  1. We fit the results of numerical  integration  of  those  distributions  to  loworder polynomials for the specific surface area and 
 6 0.098r 1.271r2 r  0.57
 5.71.152r  0.315r2 r  0.57
where  r    R-1.  The  power  p  in  the  form  factor 
was  determined  as  individual  best  fits  for several 
different  values  of  the  distribution  width  R  and 
then fitted as a function of R. 
 0.578 0.439r  0.0228r2 r  0.48
 0.0675r  0.427r2 r  0.48
With these fits the burn-up of lognormal particle 
size distributions may be treated as the burn-up of 
a single equivalent particle with matched specific 
surface area so long as the power p is appropriate 
for the width of the distribution and not the single 
sphere value of 23. 
The results of Sanduskys experiments for the 
High  Confinement  tests  at  room  temperature  for 
four different porosities are given in Table 1. Garcia32 subsequently performed SDT experiments to 
measure the run to detonation for 85 TMD HMX 
powder.  We  fit  CREST  parameters  to  fit  that 
shock sensitivity for use in our DDT simulations. 
For the LX04 distribution with SV 2.63 mm-1 and 
p 0.787 at 85 TMD our calculated transition is 
143 mm for the baseline case.  
We scaled the dimensions of the confinement 
while  keeping  the  particle  size  distribution  fixed. 
With  the  confinement  double  the  nominal  size 
eight  times  the  mass  the  run  to  detonation  was 
nearly the same at 148 mm. When the confinement 
was  half  the  nominal  size  18  the  mass  the  response  was  clearly  influenced  by  the  end  of  the 
tube. If  the  apparatus  were  a  bit  smaller  still  the 
result would have been an explosion and the transition to detonation would not occur. 
Table 1. Ambient temperature DDT results30 
Fractional density  
We scaled the particle size so that the particle 
size  distribution  has  the  same  R  value  but  the 
mean diameter is half the nominal value. When we 
simultaneously changed the laminar burn speed to 
have the same linear pressure dependence but half 
the  value  the  calculated  run  distance  was  not 
We found that a single set of CREST parameters  did  not  fit  both  the  full  density  and  reduced 
density Pop plots. Instead we needed to treat materials  with  different  initial  porosity  as  a  different 
material.  As  a  result  we  cannot  reproduce  the 
U-shaped  response  of  detonation  transition  distance  as  a  function  of  porosity  with  the  data  we 
have available to us. 
We  summarize  the  results  presented  in14  by 
observing  that  reduced  SDT  sensitivity  reduced 
confinement  strength  increased  particle  size  reduced  explosive  strength  and  increased  ignition 
front  velocity  all  serve  to  increase  the  transition 
location  distance  from  the  ignition  plane.  The 
amount of increase however depends on the mass 
burning  rate.  Large  particles  slow  mass  burning 
rates generally exhibit more sensitivity to the parameter values. 
Simulations of the response of large charges 
We investigated a hypothetical large cylindrical charge geometry using the same baseline material  of  LX04  molding  powder  beads  pressed  to 
15 porosity. The baseline charge is about 45 kg 
300 mm diameter and 400 mm long. We assumed 
the  ignition  volume  to  be  a  hemisphere  15  mm 
diameter  located on  the flat surface of  the cylinder.  By  avoiding  an  ignition  location  with  high 
symmetry we avoid convergence effects that can 
affect the response significantly. Converging pressure can locally speed up the reaction which can 
be  the  source  of  a  shock  leading  to  detonation. 
Converging  tension  can  tear  the  charge  apart  before the reaction is complete. In addition we chose 
to locate the ignition on the surface. For mechanical  ignition  this  is  the  plausible  location.  Insults 
from  the  outside  of  a  charge  will  be  strongest  at 
the  point  of  impact.  Thermal  ignitions  too  are 
likely to be from the outside. For large charges the 
heating rates from external sources are always fast 
relative to thermal transport time. The characteristic time  is 
where r is the radius and  is the thermal diffusivity.  For  our  baseline  charge  full  density  HMX 
would have a time greater than a day or so. With 
porosity the characteristic thermal time would be 
even longer. Heating rates significantly faster than 
this  result  in  thermal  ignitions  that  are  near  the 
 For  our  baseline  charge  the  ignition  transitioned  to  a  detonation  at  an  approximate  time  of 
500  s.  When  we  downsized  the  charge  to  5  kg 
300  mm  diameter  400  mm  long  the  explosive 
billet exploded but did not detonate. This charge 
was close to detonation. When we moved the ignition  volume  off  the  axis  in  a  three-dimensional 
calculation  with  a  coarser  mesh 
achieved  detonation  pressure  just  before  reaching 
the opposite corner of the charge. In this case the 
extra run distance before reaching the free surface 
was  just  enough  to  achieve  the  detonation  pressure. The dimension at which a transition to detonation  occurs  depends  on  the  particle  size  or 
equivalently the laminar burn speed. The smaller 
charge  with  the  same  particle  size  distribution  R 
value but with the median diameter half the nominal  transitioned  to  detonation  at  before  half  the 
charge was consumed. 
We conclude that a typical DDT test apparatus 
can demark when a given explosive configuration 
does  and  does  not  transition  to detonation  but  to 
apply this to other charge geometries specifically 
unconfined large charges requires a model. We do 
not conclude that our model is correct but rather 
that it may be used as a guide to designing the next 
set of experiments. 
Summary of the equations solved by HERMES 
A  recent  report33  summarizes  the  equations 
solved by the current version of HERMES. Revisions to the model subsequent to the publication of 
that report have been in two categories  modifications needed for use in ALE 3D including advection  and  bug  fixes.  The  present  versions  use  an 
input  flag  to  specify  which  computer  simulation 
program is being exercised. In this way there is a 
minimal  number  of  source  code  modifications 
needed  for  moving  from  one  simulation  program 
to  the  other.  This  trades  convenience  for  the  developer with the presence of blocks of coding that 
are  not  used  in  a  given  simulation  program.  As 
HERMES  is  applied  to  an  increasing  number  of 
test geometries various modules become more or 
less important and bugs that were present but not 
noticed  become  prominent.  They  are  typically 
fixed in the order of appearance. As a rule version 
numbers  are  changed  when  the  input  parameters 
change.  An  alphabetically  increasing  letter  after 
the number indicates other revisions for which the 
input parameters are not changed. The version of 
HERMES used for these simulations was 83e. 
JERs activity was performed under the auspices of the US DOE by LLNL under Contract DEAC52-07NA27344  and  partially  funded  by  the 
Joint  US  DoDDOE  Munitions  Technology  Development Program. Constant Volume Explosion 
W. Lee Perry Lawrence M. Hull and James E. Kennedy 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos New Mexico 87545 USA 
Abstract. The constant volume explosion CVE has been discussed in our community 
for  many  years.  It  was  suggested  as  a  thought  experiment  in  the  book  entitled 
Detonation  Fickett  and  Davis  a  process  which  could  be  understood  in  the  limit  of 
infinite detonation velocity. This approach would yield a very high detonation pressure in 
contrast  to  what  we  have  conversationally  taken  to  be  somewhere  near    the  usual 
detonation  pressure.  In  this  work  we  rigorously  show  that  the  CVE  pressure  is  indeed 
near  the detonation pressure and that the resulting process expands in a manner very 
similar  to  expansion  from  the  detonation  state.  We  further  show  the  power  deposition 
required  to  cause  a  CVE  in  both  uniform  and  non-uniform  cases.  This  requirement  is 
quite  severe  in  the  high  giga-  to  terawatt  GW  to  TW  range.  Finally  hydrodynamic 
analysis shows a copper cylinder wall will accelerate to a similar velocity regardless of 
the process. However the early time motion differs significantly. 
instantaneous  conversion  of  a 
stationary constant volume of explosive to gas and 
heat is a fundamentally different problem than the 
well  understood  detonation  process  but  one  that 
may  produce  similar  effects  on  the  surroundings. 
Detonation  is  of  course  a  reactive  shock  wave 
phenomenon  that  proceeds  through  the  volume 
whereas  the  former  only  generates  inert  shock 
waves in the surroundings after expansion begins. 
In an equilibrium thermodynamic sense a constant 
CVE  will  occur  upon 
deposition of an amount of energy equal to or just 
greater  than  the  activation  energy  resulting  in  a 
volume  of  hot  pressurized  gas  at  the  original 
volume.  In  a  dynamic  non-equilibrium  case 
energy deposition rate and chemical kinetics play a 
controlling  role  such  that  we  must  determine  the 
conditions for complete reaction while the control 
volume remains effectively constant. We find these 
conditions  using  dimensionless  analysis  of  the 
unsteady heat equation with time normalized to the 
time  required  to  accelerate  a  metal  plate  to  near 
terminal velocity. In the case of a thin plate against 
a  large  charge  this  represents  a  very  small 
expansion  and  an  approximation 
Fundamentally  we  would  like  to  know 
the  maximum  shock  pressure  and  expansion 
the  explosive-metal 
interface and how the CVE expansion compares to 
the  expansion  process 
canonical  conditions  that  occur  at  the  end  of  the 
reaction zone usually referred to as the ChapmanJouget  CJ  condition.  Further  we  would  like  to 
know  the  total  energy  and  power  deposition  into 
the  explosive  required  from  an  external  source  to 
that  occurs  after 
generate a CVE that fits the above definition. We 
have  applied  well-established  methodologies  to 
answer these questions.  
In  this  study  we  used  parameters  and 
properties  of  the  high  explosive  HMX.  The 
relevant  properties  detonation  performance  and 
thermal  decomposition  kinetics  for  this  explosive 
are  well  known.  Continuum  heat-transport  theory 
provides the conditions required to create uniform 
Dimensionless  analysis  shows  the  relationship 
relevant  physical  and 
chemical  kinetic  parameters  and 
parameter space that we expect volume explosion 
to occur. The analyses of Todes Semenov FrankKamenetskii1  provided  a  framework  to  determine 
the  power-deposition  conditions  required  for  the 
complete conversion to product gasses within this 
characteristic time. 
isentropic  expansion  of 
After establishing the conditions required 
for  a  volume  explosion  to  occur  we  applied  the 
equilibrium  thermochemical  computational  code 
distribution and thermodynamic state of the system 
over  sufficient  expansion  range  to  develop  an 
equation  of  state  EOS.  The  Jones-Wilkins-Lee 
JWL  parameterized  fitting  equation  accurately 
explosive  gas  products  from  the  CJ  state  and  is 
used for a wide range of detonation problems both 
analytic  and  computational.  The 
pressure-volume  expansion  locus  that  intersects 
the  CJ  point  is  only  one  specific  isentrope  in  a 
continuum  of  possibilities  defined  by  the  total 
energy  available  initially  from  the  conversion  of 
solid  explosive  to  gaseous  products.  The  gas 
product distribution in the CVE likely differs from 
that in the CJ reaction zone raising the possibility 
of  an  expansion  insentrope  specific  to  CVE.  We 
used  the  essential  features  of  the  JWL  EOS 
realistic  constants  to  fit  the  CHEETAH  CVE 
expansion  data  and  compared  it  to  the  EOS  for 
detonating  HMX.  Finally  we  employed 
common hydrodynamic code CTH to compute the 
velocity trajectory of a copper cylinder for both CJ 
and  CVE.  For  the  CJ  case  detonation  was 
initiated in an ideal sense along the centerline of 
Mathematical Framework for CVE 
Our analysis to find the critical power begins with 
the  standard  heat  equation  with  a  uniform  heatgeneration term a reaction heat term and constant 
  is  the  volumetric  power  deposition  from  an 
external  source  and  is  the  primary  parameter  of 
interest  here.  In  these  equations  c  is  the  constant 
pressure  specific  heat  T  temperature  t  time  x 
generalized  spatial  coordinate  Ea  activation 
energy  Rg  gas  constant  h  specific  reaction 
enthalpy mass z rate constant and X is the mass 
fraction  of  remaining  explosive.  All  other  terms 
have  their  common  neaning.  Numerical  solution 
provides  the  response  of  the  system  to  any 
characteristic  size  of  any  inhomogeneity  of  the 
field.  However  analytical 
parameters and their relationship. A dimensionless 
form of this equation is 
  and  is a dimensionless length 
variable normalized by a characteristic length. The 
symbol  is a characteristic time that is discussed 
  indicates the relevance 
of heat transport on the timescales of interest.  
A  perfect  volumetric  explosion  will  only  occur 
when  no  thermal  gradients  exist  in  the  domain 
homogeneous  material 
and  uniform  power 
deposition.  Under  those  conditions  there  is  no 
spatial derivative and the solid will be converted to 
In  this  analysis  we  are  interested  in  how  the 
volume  explosion  process  will  accelerate  metal 
compared  to  a  CJ  detonation.  In  this  context  we 
will  specify  that  complete  conversion  must  occur 
before  the  reaction  products  accelerate  a  metal 
plate to terminal velocity in the limiting case of the 
weakest  possible  shock  traveling  slightly  faster 
than the sound speed. Explosive shock loading will 
accelerate  a  plate  thickness   
velocity  in  approximately  3  reverberations  of  the 
shock  wave  within  the  plate  boundaries  at  the 
sound speed  such that our characteristic time 
This  time  defines  the  maximum  time  that  may 
elapse  between  ignition  and  complete  conversion 
to  gas  products.  An  analysis  first  suggested  by 
Todes  then  simplified  by  Frank  Kamanetskii1 
provides an estimate of this time in the absence of 
thermal  gradients  known  as 
For the purpose of this analysis CVE occurs when 
  . We define ignition as the time at which 
the  heat  production  by  reaction  exceeds  the  heat 
deposition  and  little  conversion  of  reactant  has 
solving for the critical temperature and substituting 
into  6  leads  to  an  expression  for  induction  time 
as  a  function  of  power  deposition.  At  the  critical 
Figure  1  shows  the  relationship  between  metal 
plate  thickness  and  power  deposition  to  meet  the 
criteria  using  kinetic  parameters 
representative of HMX.3 Above and to the right of 
the tau-q locus we expect CVE to occur. 
 Power Deposition Wkg
Figure 1. Critical locus for delineating the 
occurrence of CVE for a range of specific power 
deposition and plate thickness. 
Figure 2 shows the induction time-heat deposition 
behavior as determined by the numerical solution 
of  equations  1-3  and  compared  to  the  analytic 
solution of eq. 8. The upper and lower dashed lines 
were  determined  from  the  numerical  solution  of 
equations  1-3  and  calculating 
complete conversion from 0.995 upper and 0.990 
lower conversion fractions.  
 Power Deposition Wkg
where  the  equation  is  written  to  show  causality 
with  the  forcing  functions  on  the  right  and  space 
and time response on the left. If  is small relative 
to  unity  we  can  infer  the  magnitude  of  the 
exponential  term  by  knowing  an  approximate 
hc3000-5000K along with the magnitude of the 
product      Under  these  constraints  the 
value  of  the  exponential  term  is  many  orders  of 
magnitude  smaller  than    so  the  overall 
reaction term is always 1 and the heat equation 
so that the process is always dominated by the 
spatial form of the power deposition and never by 
the  non-linear  reaction  term  and  CVE  will  occur 
so  long  as      and    is  not  too  large.  The 
required  heat  deposition  to  meet  this  criteria  is 
    Wkg.  Numerical  solution  of 
equations 1-3 supports this conclusion. 
Initial Pressure and Expansion after Volume 
This  question  follows  how  do  the  product  gases 
expand  and  do  work  after  CVE  relative  to 
expansion  from  the  usual  CJ  state?  Fickett  and 
Davis  liken  the  CVE  process  to  the  CJ  process 
with an infinite detonation velocity which implies 
a  very  high  or  infinite  detonation  pressure.5 
Conversely an alternate intuitive approach simply 
evaluates  a  known  expansion  isentrope  from  the 
starting  from  the  CJ  condition  a  procedure  that 
suggests  the  initial  pressure  is  very  close  to  half 
the  CJ  pressure.  However  a  CJ  expansion 
isentrope is only a single locus on a continuum of 
initial  specific  volume  rather 
Figure  2.  Induction  time  versus  power  deposition 
from  eq.  8  and  bracketed  by  the  numerical 
solutions of eqs. 1-3. 
Volume  explosion  in  a  non-uniform  power  field 
can occur under certain circumstances. Deviations 
from  any  of  the  criteria  for  a  perfect  CVE  will 
cause  gradients  in  the  temperature  field.  The 
gradients  can  lead  to  localized  ignition  and 
combustion  waves  contrary  to  the  definition  of 
CVE.  We  will  continue  to  assume  insulating 
boundary conditions. The uniform analysis showed 
that  boundary  effects  are  not  important  because 
those conditions can only be communicated at the 
sound speed in the explosive and are thus largely 
Irregularities  in  the  spatial  power  deposition  rate 
due  to  material  or  power  source  will  lead  to 
temperature  gradients  so  long  as    .  This 
restriction therefore only excludes irregularities at 
length scales  10-6 m and localized ignition will 
occur.  However  conditions  do  exist  where  CVE 
will occur in the presence of these irregularities if 
the  power  deposition  exceeds  reaction  heating 
under all possible conditions. The theoretical limit 
for  temperature  is  the  sum  of  the  adiabatic  flame 
temperature rise given by hc and the temperature 
rise  induced  by  the  power  deposition  source.  We 
are  only  concerned  with  processes  that  occur 
within  the  characteristic  time  defined  above  and 
the  expression  for  the  maximum  possible  local 
We recognize the importance of the specific total 
enthalpy  change  relative  to  the  total  energy  per 
volume deposited and define  
Substituting  this  temperature  into  equation  4  and 
rearranging leads to  
possibilities defined by the initial energy state and 
reaction  product  distribution.  There 
fundamental reason that the isentrope achieved via 
CVE should be identical to the CJ isentrope for the 
same  material.    If  the  heat  addition  were  large 
relative to the activation energy one would in fact 
not  expect  the  CVE  isentrope  to  follow  the  CJ 
effectiveness  of  CVE  relative  to  the  CJ  process 
using  three  methods  equilibrium  thermochemical 
isentropes analytic thermodynamic cycle analysis 
and  hydrocode  calculations  CTH  of  a  cylinder 
expansion to compare the wall acceleration in the 
two  cases.    We  have  selected  HMX  at   
  because  it  is  close  to  ideal  the 
thermochemistry is well studied and because there 
are cylinder test data with corresponding pressurespecific volume equation-of-state EOS models. 
CHEETAH Calculations. Initially we investigated 
the case of the perfect marginally activated CVE 
where  the  explosive  was  uniformly  heated  to  a 
critical temperature and the chemical reaction heat 
drove  the  process  to  completion.  CHEETAH 
calculations showed the initial product distribution 
and  the  CVE  expansion  isentrope  was  nearly 
identical  to  the  CJ  case  a  somewhat  surprising 
result  in  light  of  the  previous  discussion  and  one 
can  indeed  reasonably  estimate  the  marginally 
activated  CVE  state  by  moving  down  the  CJ 
isentrope  to  the  initial  unreacted  specific  volume. 
CHEETAH  was  constrained  for  the  appropriate 
case CVE or CJ and the results for the products 
isentrope fit to the Jones-Wilkins-Lee JWL EOS.  
We  constrained  the  fits  to  have  the  appropriate 
ideal gas limit and the fit coefficients to have the 
usual relative values so that the isentrope had the 
expected shape.4 Figure 3 shows these isentropes.  
Thermodynamic cycle analysis. Detonation can be 
consisting  of  compression  of 
explosive  to  the  CJ  pressure  and  volume  by  the 
reactively  driven  shock  wave  expansion  work  of 
the  products  cooling  of  product  gasses  and  the 
change in enthalpy associated with reassembling 
the  product  gasses  back  to  the  original  unreacted 
explosive. Fickett and Davis describe this process 
Normalized Specic Volume
Figure 3. Expansion isentropes for the CHEETAH 
calculated CVE CJ cases and the standard JWL 
in  some  detail  originally  described  by  Jacobs.5 
Referring  to  Figure  4  our  analysis  computes  the 
area on the P-v plane enclosed by the Raleigh Line 
 CJ Expansion 7.4 MJkg
 CJ Compression Rayleigh line -2.5 MJkg
CJ net work 4.9 MJ kg
 CVE CHEETAH Expansion 4.6 MJkg
Normalized Specic Volume
Figure  4  pressure-volume  behavior  of  the  CJ 
process  and  the  CVE  process  calculated  by 
CHEETAH or direct thermodynamic analysis. 
expansion  isentrope  from  the  CJ  state  to  20 
volume  expansions.  As  we  stipulate  that  an 
external  source  creates  the  CVE  condition  the 
CVE  version  of  the  cycle  does  not  include  the 
compression  part  of  the  cycle  along  the  Raleigh 
line and the starting point of the cycle is the CVE 
state  at  the  initial  unreacted  specific  volume  and 
we  integrated  along  the  CHEETAH-computed 
expansion isentrope.  
compression along the Raleigh line 
expansion along the isentrope 
heat exchange with surroundings   
conservation of energy 
Where  w  q  h  cp  refer  to  work  heat  exchange 
enthalpy  and  constant-pressure  specific  heat 
respectively.  The  subscripts  rxn  f  i  refer  to  the 
chemical  reaction  the  final  state  20  volume 
expansions  and  the  initial  post-reaction  state  CJ 
or  CVE  respectively.  Integration  of  the  two 
CHEETAH-derived processes results in  
The difference between the net work output of the 
two  processes  reflects  the  differences  in  the  heat 
exchange  process  equation  15.  Thus  the  CJ 
efficiency  exceeds  that  of  the  CVE  by  slightly 
than  6.  For  comparison  Zeldovich 
estimated  a  13  difference  for  the  detonation  of 
ethylene  gas  using  ideal  gas  relationships.6  His 
analysis  showed  that  a  CJ  process  rejects  heat  to 
the surroundings at a lower temperature than CVE 
such that the heat exchange step of equation 15 is 
lower for the CJ process.  
Up  to  this  point  we  have  excluded  the 
external energy source that causes CVE. The total 
energy in the cycle analysis i.e. the area under the 
CVE expansion curve must include this value. In 
the  previous  section  Figure  2  we  showed  that 
approximately  20  GWkg 
microseconds  will  meet 
the  CVE  criteria. 
Therefore  the  minimum  specific  energy  injected 
by  an  outside  source  would  be  80  kJkg.  This 
quantity adds a small amount to the overall process 
and  the  actual  curve  for  CVE  will  remain  in  the 
boundaries described above. 
Hydrodynamic  analysis.  The  CTH  hydrocode7 
provided the tool to computationally compare 1-D 
cylindrical wall expansion for CVE and CJ cases.  
For  the  CVE  case  the  tube  wall  was  initially 
stationary  but  filled  uniformly  with  the  highpressure CVE products. In the CJ case unreacted 
explosive was initiated along the axis of symmetry 
of  the  cylinder.    Tracer  particles  monitor  the 
conditions in the products and the velocity of the 
cylinder  wall.    We  expect  the  CVE  expansion  is 
near  isentropic  in  the  products  because  no 
expansion  involves  the  typical  detonation  wave 
structure.    For  both  variants  1-D  flow  precludes 
any  shear  and  there  were  few  entropy-generation 
mechanisms in either case. The dimensions of the 
copper tube in these computations corresponded to 
those of the standard Cylinder Test 2.54 cm i.d. 
0.127  cm  wall  thickness  filled  with  1.891  gcc 
initially  present  whereas 
calculations  shown  in  Figure  5  show  that  both 
variants follow very similar expansion trajectories 
as  expected  from  the  similarity  in  expansion 
isentropes. The main differences arise in the early 
dynamics when the wall begins to move. In the CJ 
the  usual  dynamic 
characteristics  associated  with  the  pressure  and 
particle velocity momentum.  
Figure 5. Comparison of the CVE dashed and CJ 
solid wall velocities.  
to  kinetic  energy 
In the CVE case there is no initial particle velocity 
momentum  only  static  pressure.  The  differences 
in  behavior  caused  by  these  characteristics  are 
apparent  in  the  higher  jump-off  velocity  and 
early acceleration for the CJ case. However later 
in  time  the  two  processes  converge  to  the  same 
terminal velocity. In the 1-D case we expect both 
isentropic processes to convert the available work 
computed from the analytic thermodynamic cycle 
observation  that  is  not  consistent  with  the  cycle 
analysis. We do not have an explanation for this at 
this time. Note that the offset in early time is due 
to the detonation wave propagation time. 
conditions  required  to  create  a  volume  explosion 
using  a  dimensionless  analysis  having 
normalized  to  a  characteristic  time  for  metal 
acceleration.  Using  the  classical  analytic  analyses 
of  Frank-Kamanetskii  Todes  and  Semenov  we 
computed a power requirement on the order of 20 
significant  motion  of  any  confining  metal  in  a 
perfectly  uniform  system.  A  non-uniform  system 
was shown to undergo CVE if the external power 
source  deposits  significantly  more  than  1  TWkg. 
Subsequently we used two approaches to estimate 
the  CVE  initial  pressure  and  expansion  process 
CHEETAH  computational  thermodynamics  and 
hydrodynamic  analysis.  We  found  an 
pressure  after  CVE  near  but  somewhat  above   
the CJ detonation pressure. Expansion was shown 
to  follow  a  similar  isentrope  for  both  processes. 
Deposition of the critical quantity of energy by an 
external  source  did  not  significantly  change  the 
This  work  was  supported  by  the  Joint  DoD  DOE 
Munitions Program and the Los Alamos National 
Laboratory Nuclear Safety RD program. 
to  cause  complete 
1 Frank-Kamenetskii D.A. Diffusion and Heat 
Transfer in Chemical Kinetics Plenum Press New 
2 CHEETAH httpswwwpls.llnl.gov?urlscienceandtechnologychemistry-cheetah 
3 Ea  148.54 kJmol z  5.38 x 10-12 s-1 h  6.2 x 
4 Davis W.C. Shock Waves Rarefaction Waves 
Equations of State in Explosive Effects and 
Applications Chapter 3 edited by Zukas J.A. 
and Walters W.P. pp. 47-112 Springer New 
5 Fickett W. and Davis W.C. Detonation Theory 
and Experiment Dover Publications Inc. 
Mineola New York 1979. 
6 Shepherd J.E. and Wintenberger E. 
Introduction to To the Question of Energy Use 
of Detonation Combustion Journal of 
Propulsion and Power Vol. 223 p.586 2006.  
7 httpwww.sandia.govCTHCapabilities-leftnavlevel1js.html 
Question Dr. Ernest Baker US Army ARDEC 
Why do you believe that the area under the P-V 
cycle of a constant volume explosion must be the 
same  as  that  of  a  C-J  detonation  as  you  stated  in 
I Perry misspoke as the areas I presented 
differed by approximately 6 in the manner Dr. 
Baker expected CJ more efficient than CVE. 
However Dr. Bakers question illuminated an 
erroneous assumption regarding the equivalence of 
the environmental heat exchange step between the 
two processes Equation 15. We removed this 
assumption and updated our analysis and 
conclusions accordingly. We appreciate Dr. 
Bakers insight and conversations on this topic. Detonation Modeling in Peridynamic Theory 
Sandia National Laboratories 
Albuquerque NM 87185 
Abstract. Peridynamic theory is a theory of continuum mechanics that is formulated in 
terms  of  integro-differential  equations  without  spatial  derivatives.  Its  equations  remain 
valid regardless of fractures or other discontinuities that may emerge in a material due to 
loading. This theory provides a consistent treatment of both deformation and failure of 
materials  under  dynamic  loading.  In  bond-based  peridynamics  material  properties  are 
specified  through  the  pairwise  force  function.  We  apply  the  work-energy  theorem  to 
obtain the pairwise force function for a gas. With gas detonation products  represented as 
peridynamic  materials  we  then  use  the  Zeldovich  Von  Neumann  and  Doering 
detonation  model  and  the  volume-burn  algorithm  to  formulate  a  detonation  model  in 
peridynamic  theory.  We  discuss  a  numerical  method  and  implementation  of  the 
detonation model concomitant with addressing time-step stability and short-range forces. 
Finally we illustrate this formulation with simulations of a cylinder-expansion test and a 
cylinder fragmenting under explosive loading. 
Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-program laboratory managed and operated by Sandia Corporation a 
wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  Lockheed  Martin  Corporation  for  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energys  National 
Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-AC04-94AL85000 
continuum mechanics that is formulated in terms of 
integro-differential 
derivatives. Its equations remain valid regardless of 
fractures  or  other  discontinuities  that  may  emerge 
in  a  material  due  to  loading.  PD  provides  a 
consistent  treatment  of  both  deformation  and 
failure of materials under dynamic loading. In this 
paper  we  review  bond-based  PD  and  material 
modeling  in  PD.  In  bond-based  PD  material 
properties are specified through the pairwise force 
function PFF. We discuss some properties of the 
PFF. We discuss a numerical method to solve the 
fundamental  equation  of  bond-based  PD  and 
outline  development  of  a  condition  for  time-step 
stability.  We  apply  the  work-energy  theorem  to 
obtain  the  PFF  for  a  gas.  This  formulation  only 
requires  knowledge  of  the  isentrope  of  the  gas  in 
the  pressure  specific-volume  plane  and  may  be 
used  with  any  equation  of  state  from  which  the 
isentrope  may  be  obtained  analytically  or 
numerically.  With  gas  detonation  products 
represented  as  PD  materials  we  employ  the 
Zeldovich  Von  Neumann  and  Doering  ZND 
detonation  model  and  the  volume-burn  algorithm. 
In PD repulsive short-range forces act when points 
are sufficiently close. We discuss these forces since 
they provide for the transfer of momentum from an 
expanding  gas  to  structures.  We  summarize  the 
the  detonation  model.  We 
illustrate  this  formulation  with  simulations  of  a 
cylinder-expansion test and a cylinder fragmenting 
under explosive loading. 
cumulative mass distribution 
expx  exponential function 
EOSs  equations of state 
peridynamic theory or peridynamics 
pairwise force function 
ratio of circumference to diameter of a 
Zeldovich Von Neumann and Doering 
A P  set of all A with property P 
magnitude of scalar or vector A 
Peridynamic Theory PD 
The version of PD introduced in 2000 is called 
bond-based  PD1.  A  more  general  version  statebased PD was introduced later2. Here we will only 
consider bond-based PD. 
Fundamental Equation of Bond-Based PD 
Consider  a  peridynamic  body  that  occupies  a 
domain R as shown in Fig. 1. a   
Fig. 1. A peridynamic body occupying a domain. 
In  Fig.  1  left    is  the  relative  position  of 
points x and x in the reference configuration and  
is  the  difference  in  displacements  at  these  points. 
Then   is the relative position of these points in 
the  deformed  configuration.  The  scalar  quantity  s 
in this figure is called the stretch and is a measure 
                                                 
a In this figure and elsewhere bold quantities are 
vectors unless stated otherwise. 
reference  configuration    and 
of relative deformation. The relative displacement 
deformation  are also defined in Fig. 1. Thus the 
quantity        is  the  relative  displacement  after 
deformation as shown in this figure. Quantities in 
the right graphic in Fig.1 will be discussed later. 
The force density at x at time t in bond-based 
cid2025cid2206 cid1856cid2870cid1856cid1872cid2870cid2203cid2206cid1872cid3521cid2188cid1856cid1848cid4593cid3397cid2184cid2206cid1872
where x is a point in the reference configuration t 
is  the  time  x  is  the  density  at  x  u  is  the 
displacement vector R is the domain of the body f 
is  the  pairwise  force  function  PFF    and    are 
defined in Fig. 1 and b is the body-force density. 
The  integral  in  1  is  taken  over  the  volume 
occupied  by  R.  All  functions  are  assumed  to  be 
sufficiently well behaved that the integral exists. 
1  is  based  on  Newtons  second  law  for  all 
points within the domain of analysis and does not 
contain any spatial derivatives. The PFF gives the 
force per unit volume squared on a point at x due to 
the  point  at  x.  In  conventional  continuummechanics theory this functional is replaced by the 
divergence  of  the  stress  tensor.  All  constitutive 
properties of a material in bond-based PD are given 
by specifying the PFF. 
Fig.  1  right  shows  a  sphere  of  radius   
centered at the point x S x  xi xi x  . It is  
assumed  that  there  is  a  distance    such  that  the 
PFF function vanishes outside S x for each point 
x in the domain of analysis. The quantity  is called 
the  horizon  since  a  point  cannot  see  a  force 
beyond its horizon. All points within S x are said 
to belong to the family of x. The appropriate value 
of    depends  on  the  physical  nature  of  the 
application. However in numerical modeling at the 
macroscale typically  is chosen to be three times 
Properties of the Pairwise Force Function 
fundamental  equation  of  peridynamics  but  also 
imply  properties  of  the  PFF.  Newtons  third  law 
states that the force at  x due to point x must be the 
negative of the force at x due to point x. Therefore 
for  1  to  satisfy  Newtons  third  law  f  must 
satisfy cid2188cid2188forall 
Thus f  is an odd function of . 
Another property of the PFF follows from the 
requirement to conserve angular momentum in the 
absence  of  external  forces.  If  angular  momentum 
were not conserved then two points initially at rest 
would  move  even  in  the  absence  of  external 
torques.  Thus  to  insure  conservation  of  angular 
momentum f  must satisfy 
cid3397 cid3400cid21880 
where    is  the  cross  product.  This  expression 
implies that the force between any two points in the 
continuum must be parallel to their current relative 
position.  Therefore  3  implies  that    f    must 
have the functional form 
cid2188cid1832cid3397 forall 
where F is a scalar-valued function. Since f  is 
an  odd  function  of    F  must  be  an  even 
Material Modeling in Peridynamic Theory 
All  constitutive  properties  of  a  material  are 
given by specifying the PFF.  Here we summarize 
only aspects of material modeling that are needed 
for  understanding  the  solid  models  used  in  the 
examples and gases as PD materials. 
The Micro-Potential 
cid2188cid2034cid1875
A PD material is said to be micro-elastic if and 
only  there  exists  a  scalar-valued  function  w 
The  function w  is  called  the  micro-potential.  It  is 
important  to  realize  that  the  derivatives  in  5  are 
not the spatial derivatives that are to be avoided by 
The  micro-potential  has  units  of  energy  per 
unit volume squared. It represents potential energy 
density  associated  with  a  bond.  We  may  define  a 
functional  that  for  a  displacement  u  is  the  local 
displacement energy density 
cid1849cid3048cid2206cid187212cid3521cid1875cid1856cid1848
6 is the energy density at the point x and time t 
associated with a displacement u of all the points in 
domain  R.  The  factor of  12  is  present  since  only 
half the energy is associated with each endpoint of 
the  bond.  Integration  of  6  over  the  body  yields 
the total macroscopic energy functional. 
Proportional Materials 
A  class  of  PFFs  that  is  useful  for  modeling 
solid  materials  is  called  proportional  materials. 
Such  materials  are  a  further  development  of  the 
idea that micro-elastic materials may be considered 
materials  in  which  two  points  are  connected  by  a 
spring that in general may be non-linear. The PFF 
for  a  proportional  material  has  a  magnitude 
proportional to the stretch s where 
cid1871cid1868cid1870cid1870
material is cid2188cid2241cid2248 cid1859cid1871cid1870cid1868
cid1868cid3397 cid1870. 
cid2241cid3397cid2248 
The  most  general  form  of  the  PFF  for  this  
where  gsr  is  a  piecewise  linear  function  of  the 
stretch s.  The function g is called the bond force 
between two points for a proportional PD material.  
Material Failure in Peridynamic Theory 
A  bond  in  a  PD  material  fails  irreversibly 
when  the  stretch  s  exceeds  a  value  sc  called  the 
critical  stretch.  Not  only  does  the  critical  stretch 
define failure of a material but it also assures the 
existence of a horizon for proportional materials. 
To  solve  the  fundamental  PD  equation  of 
motion 1 the domain is discretized into a set of 
nodes xi as depicted in Fig. 2. Each node has a 
known volume in the reference configuration. The 
nodes form a computational grid. 
cid3036cid1856cid2870cid1856cid1872cid2870cid2203cid3036cid3041cid3533cid2188cid3435cid2203cid3037cid3041cid2203cid3036cid3041cid2206cid3037cid2206cid3036cid3439cid1848cid3037
replaced by a finite sum which at time tn is 
The  fundamental  equation  of  motion  1  is 
cid3397cid2184cid3036cid3041  9 
is the volume of node j.  The sum is taken over all 
nodes within the horizon  of xi .   
The  acceleration  term  in  9  is  approximated 
Fig. 2. Computational grid. 
by an explicit central difference 
cid1856cid2870cid1856cid1872cid2870cid2203cid3036cid3041cid2203cid3036cid3041cid2878cid28692cid2203cid3036cid3041cid3397cid2203cid3036cid3041cid2879cid2869
where t is the time step. 
9  and  10  are  solved 
n1.  The  error  in  10  is  well 
known to be second order in time.3 
 Gases as Peridynamic Materials 
Since the detonation products in an explosion 
are gases we must determine how to model gases 
as  PD  materials.  In  this  section  we  develop  a 
general  expression  for  the  PFF  of  a  gas.  This 
development  generalizes  the  development  that  is 
documented in Demmie and Silling4.  
Pairwise Force Function for a Gas 
The PFF for a gas can be determined from the 
change  in  internal  energy  per  unit  volume  of  the 
gas and expressed in terms of the expansion of the 
gas X where  cid1850cid1874cid1874cid2868 cid2868
v  and  v0  are  the  deformed  and  reference  specific 
volumes of the gas  and 0 are the deformed and 
reference densities respectively. Implementation of 
a gas model requires computing the expansion at a 
node  from  the  undeformed  and  deformed  bond 
lengths between this node and all gas nodes in its 
To derive a general expression for the PFF of 
a  gas  consider  5  and  6.  From  5  the  micropotential w may be written as 
where 0 is some fiducial state of stretch. Since the 
integral 6 vanishes outside the horizon of x Hx 
6 may be written using 12 as 
cid1875cid2206cid1872cid3505
cid1849cid3048cid2206cid187212cid3521 cid3429cid3505
cid3433cid1856cid1848
cid1856cid184912cid2188cid1856cid184812cid2188cid3397 cid1856cid1848
12cid1858cid3038cid1856cid1868cid3038cid1848cid3038 
Let all the bonds be held fixed except for bond 
k  at  a  given  value  of  .  Then  for  an  incremental 
stretch dpk in bond k 13 becomes dW where 
In 14  fk  is  the  magnitude of  the  PFF  at  bond  k 
due to this incremental stretch dpk in this bond and 
V  and  Vk  are  volume  elements  associated  with 
bond k.  The latter two equalities follow since  is 
fixed under the stretch and f is parallel to  as 
The  quantity  fk  in  14  is  the  PFF  for  a  gas. 
This  quantity  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  the 
expansion X as follows. 
Changes  in  the  energy  per  unit  volume  dW 
result  from  the  stretch  dpk.  Therefore  using  the 
definition  of  dW  and  the  chain  rule  14  may  be 
since W depends on pk through its dependence on 
written as cid1856cid1849cid2034cid1849cid2034cid1868cid3038cid1856cid1868cid3038cid2034cid1849cid2034cid1850cid2034cid1850cid2034cid1868cid3038cid1856cid1868cid3038 
cid1858cid3038 2cid1848cid3038cid2034cid1849cid2034cid1850cid2034cid1850cid2034cid1868cid3038 
The  PFF  can  be  obtained  from  16  once  the 
energy per unit volume W is known as a function 
of the expansion X and X is known as a function of 
the  incremental  stretches  for  all  gas  bonds  within 
the horizon of a node. 
Equating 14 and 15 and solving for fk yields 
a general expression for the PFF of a gas 
There are many possible ways to approximate 
the  expansion  X.  We  now  describe  the  method 
currently  implemented.  Consider  the  ratio  of  the 
reference  density  to  the  deformed  density.  This 
ratio is X. We approximate X at a given node by 
cid1850cid46861cid1848cid3533cid4678cid1870cid3037cid1868cid3037cid4679cid1848cid3037
cid4687cid2879cid2871cid1848cid3533cid1848cid3038
Calculating the derivatives in 16 using 17 
where  the  sum  is  taken  over  the  nodes  inside  the 
horizon of the given node pj  jj  rj  j and 
Vj  is  the  reference  volume  of  node  j.  We  refer  to 
the nodes inside the horizon of a given node as its 
family.  Hence  V  is  the  total  reference  volume  of 
the family of the given node. 
we obtain cid1858cid3038 6cid1870cid3038cid1848cid2034cid1849cid2034cid1850cid3436cid1870cid3038cid1868cid3038cid3440cid2870cid1850cid2872cid2871 
If we identify W with the internal energy per unit 
volume of the gas then 18 and knowledge of the 
dependence  of  W  on  the  expansion  X  yield  an 
expression for the PFF at node k.    
From  the  standard  axiomatic  formulation  of 
thermodynamics5  the  pressure  is  an  intensive 
variable defined as minus the partial derivative of 
the internal energy with respect to specific volume 
at  constant  entropy.  Therefore  the  derivative  in 
18 is the negative pressure P which implies that 
the magnitude of the PFF for node k in a gas is 
cid1858cid30386cid1842cid1870cid3038cid1848cid3436cid1870cid3038cid1868cid3038cid3440cid2870cid1850cid2872cid2871 
Implementation of 19 requires knowledge of the 
pressure P as a function of the expansion X on an 
isentrope. The negative sign indicates that the force 
Volume Burn Algorithm 
Implementation of the PFF for gases given by 
19  requires  knowledge  of  P  as  a  function  of  X 
along  an  isentrope.  To  determine  the  isentrope  to 
use  we  employ  the  ZND  model6  and  the  volume 
Fig.  3  depicts  the  pertinent  features  of  the 
ZND modelb and shows the integral that states the 
volume burn algorithm. This figure shows an initial 
state of specific volume v0 and pressure P0 and the 
Rayleigh line Rv emanating from this point. The 
                                                 
b The Hugoniot for the unreacted explosive and the 
Von Neumann spike are not shown in Fig. 3.  
specific volume vCJ and pressure PCJ. This point is 
defined  as  the  point  where  the  Rayleigh  line  and 
Hugoniot  for  the  detonation  products  are  tangent. 
The  isentrope  for  the  detonation  products  is  also 
tangent to the Rayleigh line at the CJ point.. 
 Algorithm is statement of energy conservation.
 P0 is density of unreacted explosive.
 Rayleigh line reaction product Hugoniot and reaction 
product isentrope are tangent at the CJ point.
 For an ideal gas PS0   PCJ.
Isentrope for Detonation Products 
Referenced to P0  PSv
Isentrope for Detonation 
Fig. 3. Detonation Process. 
The volume burn algorithm 
cid3505 cid1844cid1874cid1856cid1874cid3397cid3505 cid1842cid3005cid3017cid1874cid1856cid1874
cid3049cid3252cid3259cid3049cid3116
cid3049cid3252cid3259
cid3505 cid1842cid3020cid1874cid1856cid1874
cid3049cid3268cid3116
cid1844cid2029cid1842cid2868cid1847cid2870cid1874cid2868cid1847cid2870cid1874cid2868cid2870cid1874 
is  a  statement  of  conservation  of  energy  for  the 
detonation  products.  Given  the  isentrope  for  the 
detonation-product gases and the Rayleigh line7 
where U is the detonation speed. 20 is solved to 
determine the reference pressure PS0 to be used in 
this  isentrope  for  the  detonation  products  in  19. 
For  an  ideal  gas  this  procedure  yields  a  reference 
pressure half the CJ pressure. 
Time-Step Stability 
cid1858cid2015cid2022cid1829
It is possible to obtain a stability condition for 
linearized  equations 
for  one-dimensional 
cid1829cid2034cid1858cid2034
cid1873cid3036cid3041cid2014cid3041cid1857cid1876cid1868cid3435cid2018cid18611cid3439 
Applying  the  standard  assumption  for  a  von 
Neumann stability analysis8  
To  insure  stability  it  is  essential  that  the 
complex number we obtain the stability condition3 
where is  a  positive  real  number  and  is  a 
 cid1848cid3038cid1829cid3036cid3038cid2025cid3038
where Cik  Cxk  xi and k is the density of the 
densities k in 24 be given by 
cid2025cid3038cid2025cid2868cid1850  
material in node k. The sum is taken over all nodes 
in the family of node i.  
where  0  is  the  initial  density  of  the  unreacted 
explosive  or  material  in  node  k  and  X  is  the 
expansion  given  by  11  for  node  k.  For  an 
explosive  it  is  essential  that  0  is  the  initial 
unreacted  value  and  X  be  the  expansion  given  by 
17.  Otherwise  the  solution  process  is  not  stable 
and  unrealistic  fragmentation  will  occur  under 
explosive  loading.  For  solids  under  reasonable 
loadings  the  expansion  is  about  one  and      0. 
However if X is given by some model especially 
for high-impulse loading 25 is used with 0 the 
For nonlinear material models including 19 
the form of the stability condition used is  
cid1829cid3628cid2034cid1858cid2034cid18680cid3628 
In this case we apply a safety factor to the estimate 
in  24  to  account  for  possible  nonlinear  material 
response that would make the estimated stable time 
step based on 24 too large. 
In bond-based PD repulsive short-range forces 
act when nodes are sufficiently close. These forces 
prevent  bonds  from  compressing  indefinitely  and 
violating  non-impenetrability  of  matter.  They  are 
responsible  for  loading  a  solid  material  with  an 
expanding  gas.  Without  these  forces  a  container 
with a detonating explosive would not expand and 
fragment. The expanding gas would simply diffuse 
through the container. 
cid1858cid3036cid3037cid3020cid3019cid1832cid3020cid3019cid1863cid3017cid3005cid1848cid3036cid1848cid3037cid1868cid1868cid3030cid3042cid3041cid3047cid3028cid3030cid3047 
SR between them is given by 
When two nodes i and j are sufficiently close 
the repulsive force fij
where FSR is a force factor input by the user kPD is 
the  PD  spring  constant  for  the  bond  connecting 
nodes i and j p is the separation given in 7 pcontact 
is the separation where short-range forces begin to 
act  and  Vi  and  Vj  are  the  respective  volumes  of 
nodes i and j. Short-range forces are included in the 
estimate of a stable time step. 
The  quantity  pcontact  is  calculated  from  the 
input  parameters  by  the  user  for  the  material  and 
short-range forces. Since 27 is only applied when 
p  pcontact the force is negative and repulsive. 
The PD spring constant in 27 is given by 
cid1863cid3017cid300518cid1837cid2024cid2012cid2872 
where K is the bulk modulus and  is the horizon. 
Peridynamic Detonation Model 
In this section we discuss propagation of the 
detonation from initiation points equations of state 
EOSs for the detonation products and summarize 
implementation of our detonation model. 
Propagation of Detonation Program Burn 
The  detonation  times  must  be  determined  at 
each node containing an explosive. These times are 
input  processing  using  a 
Huygens  construction  procedure.  This  method  is 
called program burn. 
Program burn proceeds as follows. There are a 
set of nodes whose detonation times are specified 
user  in  the  input.  Initial  detonation  times  at  the 
other nodes are initially set to a large number. The 
construction  proceeds  by  sweeping  through  the 
grid  and  examining  at  each  node  the  detonation 
times of the nodes in a spherical neighborhood of 
this  node.  The  detonation  time  at  this  node  is  the 
smallest  time  for  a  detonation  to  propagate  from 
any  detonated  node  in  this  neighborhood  to  this 
node. This process continues until detonation times 
are  computed  for  all  nodes.  This  Huygens 
construction  procedure  insures  that  detonations 
propagate around obstacles and isolated regions of 
explosive  material  do  not  detonate.  However  if 
there  are  no  obstructions  or  isolated  regions  of 
explosive a detonation radius may be specified. In 
this case the detonation time at a particular node is 
the  minimum  of  the  times  for  the  detonation  to 
propagate  along  a  straight  line  from  the  initially 
detonating nodes to this node. 
Equations of State for Detonation Products 
In  our  implementation  of  the PD  detonation  
model  two  EOSs  are  available  an  ideal  gas  and 
the Jones Wilkins Lee JWL model. 
For  an  ideal  gas  the  pressure  PS  along  an 
isentrope is given as a function of the expansion X 
where PS0 is the reference pressure in Fig. 3 and  
is  the  ratio  of  molar  specific  heat  at  constant 
pressure  to  the  molar  specific  heat  at  constant 
is given by9 cid1842cid3020cid1850cid1842cid3020cid2868cid3436cid1848cid2868cid1848cid3440cid3082cid1842cid3020cid2868cid1850cid2879cid3082 
cid1842cid3020cid1850cid3533cid1827cid3036cid1857cid1876cid1868cid1844cid3036cid1850cid3397cid1829cid1850cid2879cid3104cid2878cid2869
where  the  Ai  Ri  C  and   are  parameters 
In the JWL model this pressure is given by10 
cid3036cid2880cid2869
determined  for  explosives  by  cylinder-expansion 
A Detonation Model for Peridynamic Theory   
Fig.  4  summarizes  the  implementation  of  our 
PD  detonation  model.  This  figure  shows  three 
aspects  of  the  implementation    the  inputs  the 
determination  of  detonation  times  during  input 
processing and the treatment of reaction products 
respective  detonation  times  the  detonation  speed 
the  density  of  the  explosive  and  EOSs  for  the 
detonation products. We use the ideal gas and the 
the  explosive-material 
detonation  times  for  all  explosive  nodes  are 
computed  prior  to  time  advancement.  Once  the 
explosive  in  a  node  has  detonated  the  detonation 
products  are  treated  as  ideal  or  JWL  gases 
undergoing  an  adiabatic  expansion  from 
reference state shown in Fig. 3. The energy of the 
detonation products is conserved using the volumeburn  algorithm.  The  PD  interactions  between 
explosive-material  nodes  are  given  by  19. 
Interactions with non-explosive material nodes are 
given by the short-range forces in 27. 
The PD detonation model was implemented in 
a  computer  code.  In  this  section  we  provide  two 
example simulations to illustrate the application of 
this  model    a  cylinder  expansion  test  and  a 
tests  use  a  hollow 
cylindrical tube with open ends. These tubes were 
filled with explosive that was detonated. 
Cylinder-Expansion Test 
Fig. 5 compares displacement versus time for a 
cylinder-expansion  test  using  a  cylinder  made  of 
copper Cu filled with explosive and a simulation 
Figure 4. Implementation of PD detonation model. 
Fig. 5. Comparisons of displacements versus time 
for an exploding Cu cylinder test. 
The  user  specifies  inputs  listed  in  this  figure 
for  the  explosive-material.  These  inputs  are  the 
the  detonation  points  and 
This figure also shows a schematic of the Cu 
tube. Initially it was 25.8 cm long with an inside 
diameter of 2.54 cm and 0.26-cm thick walls. 
The  material  model  used  for  Cu  is  the 
proportional  model  given  by  8.  The  parameters 
that  must  be  specified  for  this  model  are  the 
material  density  bulk  sound  speed  which  is  the 
square  root  of  the  bulk  modulus  divided  by  the 
density the yield strength and the critical stretch. 
The respective values used for this simulation are 
8930 kgm3 3602 ms 324 MPa and 2.0. The JWL 
model was used for the explosive. 
The  agreement  between  the  simulation  and 
data is excellent. The small deviations early in the 
test should be well within any experimental errors 
and uncertainties in the simulation. 
Fragmenting-Cylinder Test 
Fig. 6 compares cumulative mass distributions 
CMD from a fragmentation test using a cylinder 
made of steel filled with explosive and a simulation 
of this test. Initially it was 4.25 in. long with an 
inside diameter of 1.0 in. and 18th thick walls. This 
test  was  performed  at  a  facility  that  can  capture 
99 of the fragments from an exploding object. 
Figure 6. Comparisons of CMDs for a fragmenting 
steel cylinder test. 
The  steel  was  modeled  as  a  proportional 
micro-plastic  material.  A  micro-plastic  material 
uses  8  but  differs  from  the  micro-elastic  model 
only  on  unloading.  In  the  code  implementation  a 
micro-elastic  material  unloads  reversibly  but  a 
micro-plastic material does not. The values for the 
steel density bulk sound speed yield strength and 
critical  stretchc  are  7850  kgm3  3212  ms  750 
MPa and 0.11 respectively. The JWL model was 
used for the explosive. 
The  agreement  between  the  simulation  and 
data is excellent. The main disparities are for large 
mass fragments which may caused by interactions 
with the capture media sawdust or the container 
walls which are not represented in the simulation. 
Summary and Conclusions 
In this paper we described a detonation model 
for  peridynamic  theory  PD.  After  a  concise 
discussion  of  the  aspects  of  bond-based  PD  and 
numerical  method  needed  for  completeness  we 
showed how to represent gases as PD materials by 
deriving a pairwise force function PFF for a gas. 
This  derivation  was  based  on  the  work-energy 
theorem.  The  volume  burn  algorithm  was  then 
discussed.  This  algorithm 
is  a  statement  of 
conservation of energy for the detonation products 
and  provides  a  reference  pressure  to  use  in  the 
pressure  isentropes  needed  in  the  gas  PFF.  This 
algorithm is based on the ZND detonation model. 
Time-step  stability  was  addressed  since  it  is 
essential to obtain solutions to the PD equation for 
obtained  is  needed  to provide  for  solutions  as  the 
explosive  material  changes  from  a  solid  to  a  gas 
which  undergoes  expansion.  We  discussed  shortrange  forces.  These  forces  prevent  bonds  from 
indefinitely  and  violating  nonimpenetrability of matter. They are responsible for 
loading  a  solid  material  with  an  expanding  gas. 
Without  these  forces  an  expanding  gas  would 
simply  diffuse  through  the  solid.  We  provided  an 
outline  of  the  details  of  implementing  our  PD 
detonation model in a computer code. Finally we 
expanding-cylinder and fragmenting-cylinder tests. 
The  simulation  results  are  in  excellent  agreement 
with  the  data.  We  conclude  that  the  PD  with  the 
detonation model described in this paper is a viable 
technology for studying explosive loading. 
                                                 
c Damage stretch coefficient and minimum stretch 
coefficient  models  were  used  for  the  steel.  These 
models increase the critical as damage increases or 
in compression respectively. 
Reply by Paul Demmie 
A  laboratory  tested  the  steel  and  provided  a  true 
stress  versus  true  strain  curve.  We  used  the  true 
strain at failure 0.11 for the critical stretch in the 
simulation.  This  curve  also  provided  the  yield 
strength  750  MPa  for  the  steel.  The  laboratory 
also provided the bulk modulus and density which 
were used to determine the bulk sound speed. Implications of Mesoscale Phenomena on Modelling the Shock to Detonation 
Transition at Continuum Scale 
Brian D Lambourn Caroline A Handley and Heather J Lacy 
AWE Aldermaston Reading Berkshire RG7 4PR U.K. 
Abstract. At mesoscale in heterogeneous explosives reaction proceeds by burning from 
individual  hotspots  whereas  at  continuum  level  the  reactive  burn  model  needs  to 
represent  the  integrated  effect  of  burning  from  many  hotspots.    Recent  mesoscale 
calculations show that there is near pressure equilibrium between reaction products and as 
yet  unreacted  explosive  but  that  their  temperatures  and  densities  are  significantly 
different.  Other authors have shown that reaction rate at continuum level depends on the 
number  density  of  hotspots  and  burn  speed.    It  is  argued  that  hotspot  number  density 
depends  on  shock  strength  represented  by  the  non-reacted  entropy  and  the  mesoscale 
calculations show that reaction products temperature best  correlates with the burn front 
speed.  By  comparing  the  results  of  a  mesoscale  calculation  with  a  continuum  level 
calculation it is shown that the two temperature ISE model is a reasonable approximation 
for the continuum level partially reacted equation of state. 
To  this  end  Hill  Zimmermann  and  Nichols1 
continuum  scale  reaction  rate  for  burn  fronts 
propagating  from  a  distribution  of  hotpots  and 
showed  that reaction rate  depends  on  the number 
density of hotspots and a power of the burn speed. 
The  overall  extent  of  reaction  depends  on 
burning  from  adjacent hotspots  over  inter-hotspot 
distances of a few microns at most because burn 
front speeds are typically a few ms.  However 
it was shown in an earlier paper3 that at any time 
after ignition of hotspots the pressure and hence 
other  hydrodynamic  parameters  is  influenced  by 
burning from hotspots that are millimetres away. 
In the shock to detonation transition SDT in 
a  heterogeneous  explosive  it  is  generally  agreed 
that  the  shock  wave  interacts  with  defects  in  the 
explosive microstructure to form small regions of 
high  temperature  called  hotspots  some  of  which 
are  sufficiently  large  and  hot  to  react  in  times 
much  less  than  1s  after  the  shock  has  passed 
the timescale relevant to SDT.  Reaction and heat 
conduction  then  drive  burn  fronts  from  each 
hotspot  into  the  surrounding  shocked  explosive 
until it is all consumed. 
The  critical  point  is  that  the  details  of  the 
reaction  chemistry  and  burning  are  phenomena 
occurring at mesoscale whereas the reactive burn 
model  at  continuum  level  needs  to  represent  the 
integrated sum of the burning from a multitude of 
mesoscale hotspots.   
The  aim  of  this  paper  is  to  examine  the 
implications of this mesoscale physics description 
on  the  form  a  reactive  burn  model  for  studying 
SDT should take at continuum scale including the 
properties that should be adopted  for the partially 
reacted equation of state EOS model.  A simple 
analytic hydrodynamic model has been developed 
and  mesoscale  hydrocode  calculations  have  been 
carried  out  to  study  the  hydrodynamic  fields 
developed  by  a  single  isolated  hotspot  and  the 
integrated states from a distribution of hotspots. 
The questions to be addressed are 
  How  does  overall  reaction  build  up  at 
  How  do  the  pressure  and  temperature 
build up at continuum scale? 
  What  determines  the  number  density  of 
active hotspots and the reactive burn front 
  What  model  should  be  used  for  the 
partially reacted EOS at continuum scale? 
Reaction Rate for Burning from a Distribution 
Hill  et  al1  assumed  that  spherical  burn  fronts 
propagate  at  constant  speed  from  point  hotspots 
that  have  been  activated  simultaneously  at  time 
zero and used a probability argument to allow for 
the  fact  that  the  burn  fronts  would  overlap.  
Menikoff  and  Shaw2  generalised  the  problem  to 
necessarily be spherical.   
Assuming  burn  front  speed  b  is  constant 
both  models  showed  that  the  overall  extent  of 
reaction  oa  depends  on   the  average  distance 
between hotspots and b.  Then in terms of time t 
where Cm is a constant  is related to the number 
density of hotspots  by 
and m is 2 for the Menikoff  Shaw model and 3 
for the Hill et al model. 
Calculational Methods 
The  simple  analytic  model  assumes 
reaction is instantaneous and the burn front speed 
is constant.  By linearising the equations of motion 
and  equations  of  state  the  problem  for  a  single 
isolated  hotspot  is  reduced  to  solving  the  wave 
equation  using  a  velocity  potential  method.    It 
follows that the pressure field at any point within a 
distribution of hotspots can be found by summing 
the  contributions  of  the  pressures  from  each 
hotspot.    Allowance  is  made  for  the  effect  of 
overlapping hotspots using the method applied by 
Hill et al1.  Since the pressure field of each hotspot 
grows  at  sound  speed  the  summation  has  to  be 
carried out over a radius of millimetres.   
The  mesoscale  calculations  used  a  1D 
Lagrangian  hydrocode  incorporating  Arrhenius 
kinetics and heat conduction4.  A Linear Grneisen 
EOS  was  used  for  the  non-reacted  HMX  with 
constant  Grneisen  Gamma  and  specific  heat  at 
constant volume cvs.  A JWL EOS was used for 
the reaction products again with constant specific 
heat at constant volume cvg.  Local pressure and 
temperature  equilibrium  was  assumed  for  the 
partially reacted EOS.  A constant value of thermal 
conductivity k was used. 
The difficulty with a hydrocode calculation of 
a  single  isolated  hotspot  is  that  the  burn  front 
travels  at  a  speed  of  typically  a  few  ms 
whereas  the  pressure  pulse  generated  by  the 
reaction  of  the  hotspot  travels  at  sound  speed  c 
typically a few mms so that the ratio   bc is 
0.001.    In  order  to  avoid  the  leading  pressure 
pulse  being  reflected  from  the  outer  boundary  of 
the  calculation  and  affecting  the  pressure  profile 
the computational mesh was extended significantly 
thermal  conductivity  was  artificially 
increased  by  a  factor  of  250  to  increase  the  burn 
In a typical mesoscale calculation a spherical 
HMX  hotspot  of  radius  3.6m  was  embedded  in 
cooler  HMX  extending  to  a  radius  of  700m 
although  only  the  inner  16m  of  zones  was 
reactive.    The  hotspot  and  cooler  HMX  both had 
constant initial temperatures and a mesh size of 20 
zones per m was used. 
that  a  1D  hydrocode 
calculation can represent a distribution of hotspots 
is  to  insert  a  rigid  boundary  into  the  non-reacted 
explosive  at  a  radius  that  is  at  roughly  half  the 
average  distance  between  the  hotpots.    The  rigid 
spherical  outer  boundary  can  be  thought  of  as  a 
representation  of  a  polyhedron  constructed  from 
the perpendicular bisector planes between adjacent 
hotspots.  The effect of the surrounding hotspots is 
simulated by the wave reflections at the rigid outer 
boundary and the centre line. 
The  Hydrodynamic  Flow  from  an  Isolated 
In  order  to  build  a  picture  of  how  the 
hydrodynamic field develops from a distribution of 
hotspots  both  the  simple  analytic  model  and 
mesoscale  hydrocode  calculations  were  used  to 
surrounding an isolated spherical hotspot within a 
shocked explosive3. 
Typical  pressure  profiles  are  shown  in  figure 
1a and b.  In both models the pressures plotted 
are deviations from the shocked state.   
Fig.  1a.  Analytic  solution  violet  arrows  indicate 
direction of travel of burn front and pressure pulse 
Fig.  1b.  Pressure  deviation profile  for  an isolated 
hotspot  in  HMX  from  a  mesoscale  hydrocode 
Both models show that the pressure is constant 
behind  the  burn  front  which  is a  discontinuity  in 
the simple model and is narrow in the mesoscale 
immediately  ahead  is  greater  than  the  pressure 
behind the front.  The pressure profile is led by an 
inverted N-shaped shock pulse travelling at sound 
speed  and  between  the  burn  front  and  the  shock 
pulse  the  pressure  varies  approximately  as  1r.  
analytic  solution  is  qualitatively  similar  to  the 
mesoscale calculation.   
its  major  simplifications 
The  shock  pulse  travels  at  8mms  and  is 
way  off  to  the  right  in  figure  1b.    The  leading 
shock pulse in the calculation is similar in shape to 
the  analytic  pulse  except 
deviation is rounded rather than triangular. 
The  pressure  deviation  developed  behind  the 
burn front is only 1.7MPa.  In the simple model for 
an  isolated  hotpot  the  pressure  deviations  are 
proportional  to  2  and  hence  like  the  mesoscale 
calculations  are  very  small.    By  contrast  the 
temperature deviations are large figure 2. 
Fig.  2.  Temperature  profiles  -  isolated  spherical 
The  temperature  in  the  hotspot  r3.6m 
grows to approximately 3200K in the first 0.05s 
and  then  cools  to  2200K  to  match  the  reaction 
products from outside the hotspot. The burn front 
driven by reaction and heat conduction propagates 
into  the  non-reacted  explosive  which  is  still  at 
971K  from  the  passage  of  the  initial  shock.    The 
rapidly  falling  temperatures  inside  the  hotspot 
the  artificially-high 
As time progresses the overall hydrodynamic 
field  expands  at  sound  speed.    The  burn  front 
expands  much  more  slowly  but  both  the analytic 
model  and  the  hydro-calculation  show  that  the 
pressures  behind  the  burn  front and  just ahead  of 
the  burn  front  remain  constant  independent  of 
time.   The  pressure  pulse  decays  in  strength  with 
time due to divergence but between the burn front 
and  the  pressure  pulse  the  pressure  profile  just 
stretches out.  In effect the energy released in the 
propagating burn front does not increase the local 
pressure  but  maintains  the  general  form  of  the 
pressure profile as it expands. 
The Hydrodynamic Flow from a Distribution of 
For  the analytic  model  the pressure at time  t 
for  a  distribution  of  hotspots  is  the  sum  of  the 
contributions  from  all  the  individual  hotspots 
within radius ct where c is the sound speed.  The 
overall pressure field is found to grow with time in 
proportion  to  the  extent  of  reaction.    Figure  3 
typical  growth  of  overall  pressure 
deviation for the analytic model.   
temperatures 2600K in the hotspot and 971K in the 
surrounding material. 
rigid  outer  boundary  of 
Whereas the density and temperature histories 
show  transitions  between  different  levels  as  the 
burn  fronts  propagate  at  any  time  the  pressure 
history  just  shows  oscillations  about  a  slowly 
rising  mean  pressure.    The  oscillations  arise 
because  the  shock  pulse  generated  at  the  initial 
reaction  of  the  hotspot  continues  to  reverberate 
calculational domain and the centre of the hotspot 
although having been gradually smeared out into a 
pressure  pulse.    Since  the  time  for  the  pressure 
pulse to travel across the 16m domain is 2ns and 
times of interest are hundreds of nanoseconds near 
pressure  equilibrium  is  attained.    Most  of  the 
amplitude of the oscillations in figures 4 to 6 arise 
behind  the  burn  front  because  this  is  where 
spherical convergence enhances the pressure pulse.  
The fact that the perturbations are much smaller on 
the  temperature  history  plots  implies  that  the 
fluctuations are near isothermal. 
Fig. 3. Overall pressure history  analytic model 
Figures 4-6 show the calculated time histories 
of  the  pressure  density  and  temperature  along 
particle  paths  at  twenty  points  equally  spaced 
through a 3.6m hotspot and the surrounding nonreacted  HMX  inside  a  rigid  boundary  at  radius 
initial  pressure  20GPa  and 
Fig. 4. Pressure histories for a confined hotspot 
At  time  zero  the  pressure  is  20GPa  0.2Mb 
and grows to 40GPa by the time the burn front has 
reached  the  confining  wall  at  t0.55s  when 
reaction  products  fill  the  computational  domain.  
The energy released in the burn front is the cause 
of the pressure rise.  The average pressure history 
in  figure  4  is  qualitatively  similar  to  the  analytic 
model in figure 3.  
The purple arrows on figures 5 6 and 7 show the 
the  burn  front  as  it  reaches 
successive computational gauges.  In figure 5 the 
initial  density  in  the  shocked  but  unreacted 
explosive  is  2.58gcc.    The  HMX  in  the  hotspot 
reacts  very  quickly  0.01s  and  the  density  in 
the  reaction  products  falls  rapidly  to    2.0gcc.  
The  density  of  both  the  bulk  material  and  the 
reaction  products  increase  along  two  separate 
curves as the pressure rises the burn front being a 
transition  from  one  curve  to  the  other.    At  all 
computational domain is rigid the weighted mean 
specific volume remains constant so that the final 
density of the products is 2.58gcc. 
the  outer  boundary  of 
Density history of nonreacted explosive 
Fig. 5. Density histories for a confined hotspot 
Cooling of reacted hotspot 
Temperature history of 
Fig.  6.  Temperature  histories  for  a  confined 
There is a similar temperature transition across 
the burn front figure 6 from non-reacted HMX at 
1000K to reaction products at 2100K.  However 
both  temperatures  look  almost  constant  on  either 
side of the transition in the burn front.  In fact both 
temperatures are rising slowly as each component 
compresses due to the rising pressure.  Because the 
thermal  conductivity  is  set  to  an  artificially  high 
value  the  reaction  products  inside  the  original 
hotspot  cool  in    0.3s  to  the  temperature  of  the 
Thermal  conductivity  has  a  marked  effect  on 
the  temperature  histories.    Figure  7  shows  a 
calculation  with  a  more 
conductivity  twenty  five  times  smaller  than  in 
figures  4  to  6.    The  time  scale  of  the  calculation 
has increased from 0.6s to 2.0s and the gauges 
that  started  within 
the  hotspot  have  cooled 
significantly less than in figure 6.  For all but the 
last  gauge  adjacent  to  the  rigid  boundary  the 
temperature  in  the  products  gradually  reduces  as 
the burn front propagates outwards. 
Slow cooling of reacted hotspot 
Fig.  7.  Temperature  histories  for  a  confined 
hotspot with a more realistic thermal conductivity. 
The  burn  front  is  narrower  than  in  figures  5 
and 6 being 1m wide as measured from   0.01 
to  0.99.    The  gauges  are  initially  equally  spaced 
and it can be seen that the separation in the time of 
the arrival of the burn front for adjacent gauges is 
increasing  as  the  burn  front  propagates  outwards 
so that the burn front speed is decreasing whereas 
conductivity  figure  6  the  temperature  histories 
are nearly equally spaced and the burn front speed 
is nearer constant. 
the  calculation  with 
Taking  the  last  few  temperature  histories  in 
figure 7 the burn front speed is reduced by a factor 
of  four  compared  with  the  calculation  with  a 
thermal conductivity twenty five times larger. 
Implications  of  the  Mesoscale  Calculations  on 
Continuum Scale Reactive Burn models 
three  parts  required 
definition  of  a  reactive  burn  model  at  continuum 
scale that aims to model SDT i the dependence 
of  the  reaction  rate  on  the  local  state  of  the 
explosive ii for a single exothermic reaction the 
equations  of  state  for 
the  non-reacted  NR 
explosive  and  the  detonation  products  DP  and 
iii  the  model  used  to  represent  the  EOS  for  the 
partially reacted PR explosive.  
The NR and DP EOS are not independent.  For 
example  problems  arise  if  the  NR  and  DP 
Hugoniots cross.  It was shown in reference 5 that 
for the reaction to remain exothermic the DP EOS 
surface  in  pressure  p    specific  volume  v   
specific  internal  energy  e  space  must  lie  above 
the NR EOS surface  for all v and e.  In addition 
experience  with  the  continuum  reactive  burn 
model  CREST6  has  shown  that  there  is  a  strong 
coupling between the overall EOS and the reaction 
rate.  Every time the EOS is changed particularly 
the NR EOS the reaction rate has to be updated in 
order to fit the calibration data7. 
Many reactive burn models use a reaction rate 
dependent on pressure coupled with pressure and 
temperature  equilibrium  between  non-reacted 
explosive and detonation products for the PR EOS.  
In contrast the CREST reactive burn model6 uses 
a  shock  strength  dependent  reaction  rate  where 
shock strength is defined by the entropy in the NR 
explosive  and  Cowperthwaites  ISE  model8  for 
the  PR  EOS  in  which  pressure  equilibrium  is 
assumed but there is thermal isolation between the 
NR  and  DP  states.    The  NR  state  is  assumed  to 
change isentropically between shocks. 
Dependence of Reaction Rate 
The analyses  by  Hill et al1 and Menikoff and 
distribution  of  hotspots  show  that  the  overall 
reaction  rate  depends  on  the  number  density  of 
active hotspots  and burn front speed b.   
fronts  propagating 
It  seems  plausible  to  argue  that  each  sample 
drawn  from  a  single  batch  of  a  tightly  specified 
explosive  will  have  a  similar  total  number  of 
defects  per  unit  volume.    When  a  shock  passes 
through  the  explosive  every  defect  potentially 
forms a hotspot so there will be a distribution of 
hotspot  temperatures  shapes  and  sizes  which  is 
characteristic of the batch of explosive.  But only 
those  hotspots  above  a  critical 
temperature  will  form  active  hotspots  that  can 
create a propagating burn front.   
There  have  been  many  studies  to  find  the 
critical  size  of  hotspots  as  functions  of  the 
temperature of the hotspot and of the surrounding 
bulk  temperature  of  which  reference  4  is  an 
example.    Critical  hotspot  size  decreases  as  the 
hotspot  temperature  increases  but  also  decreases 
as the bulk temperature increases.   
The  stronger  the  shock  the  greater  is  the 
number  density  of  active  hotspots  since  the 
temperature  is  higher  so  more  hotspots  will  be 
above  the  critical  temperature.    Hence  it  follows 
that  the  number  density  of  active  hotspots    is 
dependent on shock strength.  
As has been shown9 hotspots do not all react 
in very short times after the shock has passed.  For 
example  figure  8  shows  the  temperature  histories 
for  a  mesoscale  calculation  with  realistic  thermal 
conductivity  for  a  1m  radius  hotspot  in  a  2m 
radius  boundary  where  the  bulk  material  is  at 
1000K and the hotspot temperature is 1200K.  The 
hotspot explodes at 0.55s. 
Fig. 8. Temperature histories for a 1200K hotspot 
From  a  continuum  viewpoint  it  follows  that 
active hotspots can start contributing to the overall 
extent of reaction throughout its growth. 
Mesoscale  hydrocode  calculations  of  both 
isolated  and  confined  hotspots  have  been  carried 
out to investigate the dependence of the burn front 
speed  on  the  initial  and  dynamic  values  of  the 
parameters.  It has been found that  
temperature  THS  although  the  time  of 
burn front formation is dependant on THS 
burn  front  speed  increases  with  the  bulk 
surrounding temperature at constant initial 
burn  front  speed  varies  with 
In  order  to  explore  the  dependence  of  burn 
front speed on initial conditions calculations have 
been  carried  out  with  the  bulk  HMX  in  the 
Hugoniot state at three initial shock pressures 10 
15 and 20GPa and at 20GPa shock and release 
and  double  shock  situations.    In  the  shock  and 
release  calculations  the  internal  energy  density 
and temperature correspond to HMX that has been 
shocked to 25GPa and then released isentropically 
to 20GPa.  In the double shock case the HMX was 
assumed to have experienced a first shock to 1GPa 
and  then  a  second  strong  shock  that  takes  the 
Since  many  of  the  calculations  assumed  an 
isolated hotspot iso a high constant conductivity 
was assumed as illustrated in figures 2 and 4 to 6.  
Other calculations assumed the bulk material was 
rigid  outer  boundary  and 
correspond when viewed from a continuum level 
to  a  constant  volume  burn  cvb  configuration.  
Table  1  summarises  the  calculations.    All  the 
calculations  were  carried  out  with  the  same 
Arrhenius  reaction  rate  and  equations  of  state 
including  pressure  and  thermal  equilibrium  as  in 
temperature  at  the  CJ  state  Tcj.    The  standard 
value  of  Tcj  is  3000K  but  in  order  to  explore 
changing  the  temperature  without  changing  the 
basic hydrodynamic states alternative values of Tcj 
 3500K and 4000K were also used in some of the 
calculations.    Burn  front  speeds  were  extracted 
from  the  last  few  gauges  in  each  simulation  and 
are fairly approximate. 
is  evaluated  using  a 
the  reaction  products 
As  is  illustrated  in  figure  7  burn  front  speed 
decreases  as  the  temperature  of  the  products 
temperature difference across the burn front or the 
temperature of the reaction products might be the 
key parameter in determining burn front speed.  Of 
the  two  the  reaction  products  temperature  Tg 
was  found  to  have  the  best  correlation  with  burn 
speed figure 9 for the calculations in Table 1. 
Table 1. Summary of Calculations 
Fig. 9. Variation of burn front speed with reaction 
products temperature from mesoscale calculations. 
It  must  be  stressed  that  figure  9  is  not  a 
prediction  of  burn  front  speed  for  HMX  because 
the  calculations  were  carried  out  with  an 
artificially high thermal conductivity.   
The conclusion from mesoscale considerations 
is that reaction rate depends on shock strength NR 
entropy  and  currently  the  best  correlation  found 
for the burn front speed is with the temperature of 
the reaction products Tg.  In future in CREST7 it 
is  planned  to  explore  the  use  of  reaction  rates 
dependent on Tg as well as entropy.   
The Partially Reacted EOS 
When  used  to  consider  a  distribution  of 
hotspots  the  simple  analytic  model  shows  that 
pressure  equilibrium  between  NR  explosive  and 
products is a well founded assumption and that the 
pressure  in  the  NR  explosive  ahead  of  the  burn 
front increases isentropically.  This is supported by 
the mesoscale calculations of a single hotspot with 
a reflective boundary. 
All  partially  reacted  PR  EOS  models  at 
continuum level assume that in any instant of time 
a small amount of NR explosive is converted into 
reaction products which is equivalent to assuming 
that  burn  fronts  are  discontinuities.  While  the 
mesoscale  calculations  show  that  burn  fronts  are 
1m thick these are in explosive charges that are 
many orders of magnitude larger in dimensions so 
the  assumption  of  an instantaneous  transition  is a 
very good approximation. 
The results from all the mesoscale calculations 
show  that  there  is  near  pressure  equilibrium  but 
the  non-reacted  explosive  and  reaction 
products have significantly different densities and 
temperatures.    Thus  the  concept  of  temperature 
equilibrium is not appropriate at continuum scale. 
considerations  is  that  the  non-reacted  explosive 
isentropically and that the burn fronts propagating 
from  the  hotpots  thermally  isolate  the  products 
from  the non-reacted  explosive.    This  description 
leads to Cowperthwaites ISE model8 as the most 
appropriate PR EOS model at continuum level at 
least  for  the  majority  of  the  shock  to  detonation 
The suitability of the ISE model can be tested 
by  viewing  a  multiple  hotspot  mesoscale 
calculation from continuum level.  The calculation 
represents a  member  of  a  distribution  of  hotspots 
realistic  conductivity 
that  have  all  been  initiated  at  time  zero.    From 
this  can  be  regarded  as  a 
contained  region  of  explosive  that  is  undergoing 
constant  volume  burn  i.e.  overall  reaction  is 
starting  uniformly  at  time  zero  in  a  constant 
overall volume. It follows that at continuum level 
the  problem  can  be  solved  analytically  using  the 
partially  reacted  EOS.    The  pressure  is  evaluated 
as a function of overall extent of reaction oa. 
where v is constant.  The specific internal energy 
increases with oa from the initial bulk value eb 
where  Q  is  the  specific  detonation  energy.    The 
calculation  proceeds  at  any  oa  by  guessing  the 
specific  volume  of  the  non-reacted  explosive  vs 
evaluating its pressure ps by expansion along the 
NR isentrope using the mixture rules for v and e 
to  give  vg  and  eg  and the  EOS  of  the  products  to 
give pg and then iterating until the two pressures 
At any value of oa at continuum level there is 
a  relation  between  oa  and  the  inferred  radius  of 
the burn front a at mesoscale 
where g is the density of the reaction products and 
Mo  is  the  total  mass  contained  in  the  hotspot 
calculation.  In turn the radius of the burn front can 
be related to a time in the mesoscale calculation. 
The  line  in  figure  10  shows  the  variation  of 
pressure  with  the  inferred  burn  front  radius  from 
the  continuum  level  ISE  calculation.    The  red 
crosses  at  various  values  of  a  show  the  range  of 
pressures at t  0.2 0.4 0.8 1.2 and 1.6s in the 
mesoscale calculation.   
Figures  11  and  12  compare  the  profiles  of 
density and temperatures at the same set of times. 
The  full  lines  are  taken  from  the  mesoscale 
calculation  and  the  dashed  lines  show  the  two 
densities  and  two  temperatures  for  the  continuum 
scale  ISE  calculation  using  the  link  between 
overall oa and burn front radius from equation 5 
to form an artificial burn front.  The hotspot is still 
hot and so is at lower density because pressure is 
uniform across the mesh.  Bearing in mind that the 
hotspot only represents 3 of the overall mass in 
the calculation the density agreement is good.   
Fig. 10. Pressure as a function of burn front radius 
Fig. 11. Comparison of density profiles 
Fig. 12. Comparison of temperature profiles  
The  full  lines  in  figure  12  show  that  at  any 
time  the  temperature  of  the  products  in  the 
mesoscale  calculation  decreases  with  radius 
whereas the continuum level ISE calculation has a 
single products temperature.  However in the ISE 
calculation the products temperature is decreasing 
with time in agreement with the mesoscale results 
and  at  any  time  represents  a  reasonably  good 
average of the mesoscale temperatures. 
It  is  concluded  that  the  ISE  model  gives  a 
reasonable representation of the implications of the 
mesoscale calculation and is therefore appropriate 
for use in continuum level reactive burn models 
Discussion and Conclusions 
Modelling the shock to detonation transition in 
heterogeneous  explosives  is  different  in  kind  at 
mesoscale  and  continuum  scale. 
processes  of  reaction  and  burning  from  hotspots 
occur  at  mesoscale.    Reactive  burn  at  continuum 
integrated  effects  of  a 
distribution of hotspots.  Consequently the form of 
the  reaction  rate  and  aspects  of  the  equation  of 
state  model  at  continuum  level  can  be  quite 
different from that at mesoscale.  At mesoscale it 
is plausible to use Arrhenius kinetics with pressure 
appropriate  at  continuum 
level  as  will  be 
By considering burning at constant speed from 
each  hotspot  in  a  spatial  distribution  of  hotspots 
Hill  et  al1  and  Menikoff  and  Shaw2  have  shown 
that the integrated reaction rate at continuum level 
is a function of the number density of hotspots and 
the speed of the burn fronts.  The resulting reaction 
rate  history  grows  to  a  peak  and  then  decays  to 
zero  quite  different  in  shape  from  an  Arrhenius 
reaction  rate.  The  shape  of  the  reaction  rate  has 
similarities to that used in CREST6 an example of 
which is given in reference 7. 
It  is  plausible  to  assume  that  the  number 
density  of  active  hotpots  is  dependent  on  shock 
strength.  There are various ways of defining shock 
strength for example using pressure or density but 
neither  can  predict  the  effect  of  changing  initial 
density or initial temperature.  The solution in the 
CREST  reactive  burn  model  which  has  been 
found to be successful in many situations is to use 
the entropy of the non-reacted explosive. 
Shock  Compression  in  Condensed  Matter  2009 
pp. 432-435 AIP 1195 2009. 
Arrhenius  kinetics  and  heat  conduction  have 
shown  that  the  burn  front  speed  best  correlates 
with  the  temperature  of  the  reaction  products 
behind the burn front figure 9. 
Using  an  analytic  model  and  the  mesoscale 
calculations  it  has  been  shown  that  the  pressure 
generated  by  an  isolated  hotspot  is  tiny  but  the 
temperature  difference  between  reaction  products 
and non-reacted explosive is large.  The width of 
the  hydrodynamic  field  for  an  isolated  hotspot 
grows  at  sound  speed  c  which  is  around  a 
thousand times the burn front speed. 
At continuum level the overall pressure from 
a  distribution  of  hotspots  at 
summation  of  contributions  from  all  the  hotspots 
in  a  sphere  of  radius  ct.    In  a  gas  gun  shock 
initiation  geometry  this  includes  all  the  hotspots 
between  the  interface  with  the  flyer  and  a  point 
ahead on the shock front.   
With small oscillations the pressure is uniform 
across  the  reaction  products  and  non-reacted 
explosive.  By contrast the density and temperature 
of  products  and  reactants  are  quite  different.    A 
partially reacted EOS at continuum scale therefore 
needs  to  be  a  pressure-equilibrium  two-density 
two-temperature model which suggests the use of 
Cowperthwaiites  ISE  model8.    A  comparison 
figures  10  to  12  between  an  ISE  calculation  at 
continuum scale and a confined hotspot calculation 
at mesoscale has shown reasonable agreement. 
improved  equations  of 
hydrocode calculations.  For example relaxing the 
assumption  of  constant  specific  heat  would 
significantly  reduce  the  non-reacted  temperature.  
More  complicated  reaction  rates  also  need  to  be 
examined e.g. an endothermic precursor reaction.   
Mesoscale arguments such as those presented 
here form a solid basis for the development of the 
next generation of reactive-burn models. Propagation of detonation waves in ANFO conned by high sound-speed materials
Stefan Schoch and Nikolaos Nikiforakis
Cavendish Laboratory Laboratory for Scientic Computing
Department of Physics University of Cambridge CB3 0HE UK
Abstract. Due to the low manufacturing cost ease of handling and low risk of accidental
ignition ammonium-nitrate-fuel-oil ANFO remains one of the most popular mining explosives at present. The non-ideal detonation behaviour of ammonium-nitrate-based explosives can lead to detonation velocities as low as one-third of the ideal velocity. Under those
conditions the ow in the conner can become subsonic a ow condition under which
classical shock-polar analysis is not applicable restricting the use of popular engineering
models like detonation shock dynamics and Wood-Kirkwood type models. In addition it
has been suggested in the literature that subsonic ow in the conner will increase the
inuence of the conning material on the detonation performance. In this work we use a
multi-phase explosive model coupled to an elastic-plastic model for the representation of a
conner to explore the interaction of detonations under these connement conditions. Detonations in ANFO are investigated in aluminium and steel connement of 5 mm and 30 mm
thickness representing the conner as either purely plastic or elastic-plastic material.
It has been estimated that in approximately half
of current operational rock blasting situations rock
sound speeds are similar to or greater than the detonation velocities of the explosives1. These high
sound-speed geological materials which act as conners for the explosive can transport detonation energy upstream ahead of the detonation shock but
the net effect on the detonation performance is still
Regarding high sound-speed conners two connement cases are observed that are of interest to
both the mining industry and the military. Both of
these cases form part of this study since the streamline deection between explosive and conner cannot be derived with shock-polar analysis the rst
case corresponds to stiff conners which are conners that possess an ambient sound speed lower
than the detonation speed of the explosive with
the only possible shock-polar match being with a
Prandtl-Meyer expansion fan in the conner3. This
corresponds to a low-pressure shock driven from the
conner into the explosive and implies a negative
streamline deection. Conners of military explosives falling in this category are usually light metals with high sound-speeds3 or in mining applications ANFO conned by kimberlite1. In the second case the ambient sound-speed in the conner is
greater than the detonation velocity of the explosive
and the ow in the conner becomes subsonic. This
case corresponds to unsteady conners3. In these
conditions information cannot be retrieved from the
shock-polar analysis since the connement interac
1031
tion is shock-free and typically a pressure gradient
is found in the conner which moves with the detonation velocity. In mining applications this case
could occur when ANFO is conned by hard rocks
such as granite1. The behaviour of stiff and unsteady conners is in contrast to the two classical conner interactions weak and strong connement usually observed in military high explosives
in which the explosive drives a shock wave into the
Fig. 1. Shock-polar for ANFO and steel in classical
connement left and stiff connement right.
The knowledge of detonation performance like
velocity of detonation front curvature is of critical
importance to the mining industry as it can be used
to tailor the fracture and heaving process of an explosive to the demands in the eld. Unfortunately
experimental data for mining explosives under controlled connement conditions is sparse and rock
data from eld experiments usually shows large statistical variations. This makes it difcult to pinpoint
the effects of the high sound-speed connement on
the detonation performance.
In order to obtain a
better understanding of the dependence of detonation performance in mining explosives on the sound
speed of the conner both additional experiments
and numerical studies of exemplary congurations
To this end we perform numerical simulations
based on a multi-phase model4 which has been
demonstrated to be suitable for modelling mining
explosives5 coupled with an elastic-plastic model
to describe the conning materials6. The elasticplastic model we adopt is based on the conservative formulation as used by Miller and Colella7.
Since it was found that mining explosives in subsonic connement conditions show a greater conner dependence2 8 than under classical conne
ment conditions due to their long reaction zones
a comparison of the purely plastic uid conner
model with an elastic-plastic conner model is carried out.
Single-pressure and single-velocity multi-phase
The multi-phase model with mass transfer4 can
The subscript k indicates the material to which
the value applies with k the volume fraction k
the density and ck the sound speed. The common
velocity vector is denoted by u and the mixture
quantities of total energy E total density  and the
Wood sound speed c are given by
with the mass fraction Yk  kk and internal
Equation of state for uids
The ANFO used in this study is a mixture of
ammonium nitrate prills and fuel oil with a mixture weight ratio of 94.65.4 and porous density
  810kgm3 as used by Schoch9. The unreacted ANFO is represented in this study by a twophase mixture of the condensed ANFO phase and
a gaseous void phase while the reaction products
are represented by a single uid phase. The condensed ANFO phase and the inert conner materials
are represented by means of a Shock-Mie-Grneisen
with 0 representing the Grneisen Gamma vc
specic volume of the condensed phase for material
k and pkref vk the pressure reference along the
linear shock expression relating particle speed up
and shock speed us  c0  sup.
The Williamsburg WMBG EoS11 is used to represent the reaction products. It is a variable- equation of state tted to the release isentrope from an
ideal detonation code with matching adiabatic  at
the CJ state. The internal energy is given by
and with A and B being polynomials of order N.
In this study the tting order is N  2 and the
reference specic density 0
1100.4 kg m3. The heat release constant in the explosive is given by Q  4.09 MJ kg1.
Table 1. Explosive uid conner void and reaction
products equation of state parameters.
The ANFO void phase and air unconned detonations are represented by the Ideal Gas IG EoS.
A summary of all parameters used in this study is
A two-stage pressure-dependent reaction rate is
adopted as the reaction model representing the subgrid-scale chemistry. The model was formulated to
mimic the hot-spot behaviour in ammonium nitrate
emulsions during detonation propagation14
where Y represents the reaction progress. The reaction rate parameters for detonation propagation of
ANFO5 were adjusted to reproduce the experimentally obtained velocity of detonation VOD vs inverse radius graph unconned. The reaction rate
parameters are given by
Elastic-plastic model
The solid material description in this study is expressed in an Eulerian reference frame7 and consequently the deformation of the material cannot be
retrieved from the mesh distortion. In this study the
deformation is accounted by the Eulerian deformation gradient which relates the spatial coordinate
frame x current conguration to the material coordinate frame X reference conguration
The corresponding conservation laws for the evolution of the deformation gradient were derived
The evolution of the inverse or Lagrangian deformation gradient G  F1 including
plastic deformation leads to the evolution system7
with the vector components i and tensor components ij. The total energy E density  and stress
tensor ij are given by
It is assumed7 that the total deformation can be
decomposed multiplicatively into elastic and plastic
Equation of state for solids
Assuming volume preserving plastic deformations detFp  1 implies that the material internal
energy depends only on the elastic deformation gradient and entropy
The internal energy for isotropic materials can be
written such that it only depends on the three invariants of the Finger tensor B  FT F1 where
The particular form of the equation of state used
in this study is based on the empirical form of Miller
eI1 I2 I3 S  eHydroI3  eShearI1 I3
and the ambient density 0 and the shear modulus
0. The parameter sets for aluminium and mild steel
as used in this study are given in Table 2.
Table 2. Solid equation of state parameters for aluminium and mild steel.
The yield surface in this study is given by the Von
with Y being the constant yield stress and the
matrix norm cid4  cid4 being the Schur norm cid4cid42 
The connement conguration material type
thickness as well as charge size of ANFO plays a
crucial rule in its explosive performance. The detonation velocity of ANFO can be as low as onethird of the ideal detonation velocity with the VOD
vs inverse radius graphs and front curvatures being
strongly dependent on the connement.
In order to study the effect of a high soundspeed conner on the performance of ANFO we
perform numerical rate-stick experiments similar to
those in recent articles5 17 under aluminium connement comparing the results obtained by using a full elastic-plastic conner model and a uid
purely plastic approximation. Amongst others the
conners shock-free behaviour and the locally concave detonation front are interesting features observed in experiments with ANFO under aluminium
connement2. In order to demonstrate the unusual
connement behaviour of aluminium a comparison
of aluminium with mild steel connement is carried
The ANFO is detonated in all simulations by
a high-pressure booster high-pressure region with
unreacted explosive at an initial pressure of p 
1 GPa at the end of the charge. The detonation is
then allowed to travel twenty times its charge radius
in order to ensure the transition to steady state is
complete5. The detonation velocity is determined
through a least square t to the positional data of
the detonation front over the distance of two radii
length at the end of rate-stick.
Aluminium versus steel comparison
The ambient density of aluminium is taken to
be 2700 kgm3 and the ambient density of steel
7840 kgm3. Corresponding p-wave and s-wave velocities of aluminium and steel obtained from the
elastic EoS are summarised in Table 3 yielding ambient bulk sound-speeds of 3571 ms for steel and
5164 ms for aluminium.
Table 3. Wave velocities of p-wave vp and s-wave
vs derived from corresponding EoS parameters under ambient conditions.
The ideal detonation velocity of ANFO determined by the EoS parameters in Table 1 is Dideal 
4804 ms. Consequently the aluminium conner remains completely shock-free in all rate-stick congurations as the ambient sound-speed exceeds the
ideal detonation velocity this connement scenario
belongs to the unsteady connement condition.
The steel conner in contrast exhibits classic connement for the largest charge radii stiff con
nement in the transonic region with D  c0 and
unsteady behaviour for smaller charge radii with
VOD and interface displacement
The VOD vs inverse radius graphs for aluminium
and steel connement with 5 mm and 30 mm connement are shown in Fig. 2.
Aluminium tube 30 mm
Fig. 2. VOD vs inverse radius comparing steel and
We note that in the remainder of this paper the
square symbols represent experimental data while
other symbols represent the numerical simulation
results. The VOD graphs for aluminium connement are concave for 5 mm as well as for most of
the 30 mm connement. The detonation velocity
of the 5 mm aluminium-conned rate-sticks experience the largest drop towards smaller charge radii
due to the high sound-speed the outer wall expansion affects the detonation earlier. The VOD curve
for the steel conner is concave for the 5 mm connement and small charge radii which is in contrast to the previously studied emulsion explosive17
where steel conned VOD curves remained convex.
We note that the difference in the VOD graphs
between 5 mm and 30 mm conned steel tubes are
more pronounced with ANFO as in the previous
emulsion study17. Due to the smaller ideal detonation velocity of ANFO compared to the emulsion the steel connement becomes stiff and unsteady which causes the detonation velocity to be
more sensitive to connement size8.
The conner interface location with four differ
1035
ent connement congurations is shown in Fig. 3
exemplary for the charge radius rc  19.8 mm.
Distance from detonation front mm
Fig. 3. Explosive-conner interface displacement
comparing steel and aluminium conners rc 
Under aluminium connement an initial inward
motion is visible before the reaction product gases
expand the tube. This inward motion is more pronounced under 30 mm aluminium connement as
with the thinner 5 mm aluminium connement.
This feature can also be seen in the pressure contour plots for aluminium Fig. 4 and is caused by
acoustic waves in the conner which transport energy ahead of the detonation front. This inward motion pre-compresses the unreacted explosive in the
vicinity of the interface and could potentially lead
to a voidage reduction which could lead to desensitisation of the explosive. We note that the 30 mm
steel conned rate stick which belongs to the stiff
connement case also exhibits an inward motion of
the interface location but of much smaller extend as
the unsteady aluminium cases  0.015 mm compared to 0.3 mm. This shows that the energy transport under unsteady connement is stronger than
under stiff connement.
We consider the acoustic wave support in the unsteady case to explain in part the downward curvature in the VOD vs radius graphs as it can also be
observed in the steel conned congurations with
5 mm as soon as the VOD drops below the ambient sound speed. This transport behaviour and
the initial inward motion of the conner were also
observed in an experimental study that considered
ANFO under aluminium connement2.
Under classical connement
the most common connement case observed with military
explosives1 the induced shock waves in the conner cause reverberations along the explosiveconner interface also known as ringing8. Due
to the high ambient sound speed no shock waves are
present in the aluminium conner and consequently
reverberations are absent in the interface prole
plots in Fig. 3. In addition the subsequent tube expansion following the inward motion is greater for
the 5 mm conned rate-stick as for the 30 mm connement independent of the connement scenario
and material as previously suggested by an analytical study8.
Charge of radius 19.8 mm
The pressure contour plots for the charge radius
rc  19.8 mm in Fig. 4 show the conner features
in the stiff and unsteady case.
Fig. 4. Pressure contour plots with the conner interface white dashed and DDZ black dashed for
rc  19.8 mm in aluminium left and steel right
connement with 5 mm top and 30 mm bottom
The acoustic waves in the 5 mm steel and both
5 mm and 30 mm aluminium conner travel faster
than the detonation speed and the transition to the
shockless behaviour is complete at this charge radius unsteady case. Hence the ow in the conner is subsonic and the steady-state problem inside the conner becomes elliptic8. The aluminiumconned detonation goes into quasi-steady state
since the DDZ could be affected through the conner material globally. Pressure prole contours inside the conner are dispersed and they decay further with increasing distance from the charge axis.
The pressure waves travelling ahead of the detonation front cause a locally concave detonation front
The 30 mm steel connement
still exhibits a decaying shock wave and belongs to
the stiff connement case. The shock wave in the
inert material travels faster than the detonation and
consequently induces a weak expansion wave into
the unreacted explosive.
Charge of radius 99 mm
The contour plots for rc  99 mm with 5 mm and
30 mm connement show strong differences in the
pressure contours in Fig. 5.
Fig. 5. Pressure contour plots with the conner interface white dashed and DDZ black dashed for
rc  99 mm in aluminium left and steel right
connement with 5 mm top and 30 mm bottom
The detonation velocity and pressures at rc 
99 mm with 30 mm connement are strong enough
to drive a shock wave into the conner and represent the strong connement see corresponding
shock-polar in Fig. 1left. The 5 mm steel conned charge belongs to the stiff connement see
corresponding shock-polar in Fig. 1right and the
detonation velocity in the 5 mm and 30 mm aluminium conners remain below the sound speed in
aluminium and display the unsteady connement
The qualitative differences in pressure proles inside the conner between classical connement and
stiff connement can be seen by comparing the
30 mm steel conned tubes for rc  99 mm in Fig.
5 bottom right and rc  19.8 mm in Fig. 4 bottom
right. Since the shock wave in the steel is faster
than the detonation velocity in the stiff case it
disperses as can be seen in the rounding of the pressure peak in Fig. 4 bottom right.
Due to the fairly large charge radius the thinness of the aluminium conner 5 mm is not as
detrimental to the detonation velocity and expansion as in the small charge radius case nevertheless
a shape change in the DDZ can be seen.
Steel Fluid versus elastic-plastic conner
Steel exhibits all three connement types across
the detonation velocities observed in ANFO. For
large charge radii with close-to-ideal detonation
velocities classical connement is observed for
smaller radii the steel acts as a stiff conner the
ambient bulk sound-speed of steel is slower than
the detonation velocity but the induced shock wave
travels faster than the detonation front. Unsteady
connement occurs as soon as the charge radius or
connement is small enough for the detonation velocity to drop below the ambient sound-speed in
The numerical VOD vs inverse charge radius
curves obtained with the uid and elastic-plastic
steel conners are presented in Fig. 6 together
with indicator lines for the velocities at which
the transition between classical stiff and unsteady connement takes place. The elastic conner model always predicts detonation velocities
below the uid conner model. The quantitative
differences between the two steel conner models
Steel tube 5 mm elastic-plastic
Steel tube 30 mm elastic-plastic
Steel tube 5 mm fluid
Steel tube 30 mm fluid
Fig. 6. VOD vs inverse radius comparing the uid
and elastic-plastic steel conners.
become stronger in smaller charge radii. Based on
the results in Fig. 6 the uid conner model can be
regarded as a reasonable approximation up to the
unconned failure radius with errors in the detonation velocity of less than 60 ms. It is noteworthy that during a comparison of the emulsion explosive in17 no quantitative differences between uid
and elastic-plastic conner were found in the steel
case showing that differences become more pronounced under stiff and unsteady connement.
The quantitative differences for 5 mm and 30 mm
connement remain small in the steel setup which
is in contrast to the 30 mm aluminium connement
shown in the next section.
Distance behind front mm
Fig. 7. Pressure contour plot with the steel interface black line for rc  99mm under 30 mm
connement. The uid conner dashed lines and
elastic-plastic solid lines are provided from 1 GPa
to 7 GPa at pressure intervals of 2 GPa.
The numerical solution of the elastic-plastic conned rate-sticks allows us to identify the effects of
the elastic waves. Although the detonation velocity at the largest charge radius of rc  99 mm remains unaffected by the connement model qualitative differences between the uid and elasticplastic models can be observed in the pressure contours in Fig. 7. The plastic shock inside the steel
decays more in the elastic-plastic conner model as
compared to the uid conner see rounding of the
solid contour lines.
Aluminium Fluid versus elastic-plastic conner
ANFO conned by aluminium exhibits purely the
unsteady connement case as the sound speed of
aluminium is above the ideal detonation velocity of
ANFO. The differences in VOD occurring due to
the representation of the aluminium conner as either a uid or as an elastic-plastic material can be
Aluminium tube 5 mm elastic-plastic
Aluminium tube 30 mm elastic-plastic
Aluminium tube 5 mm fluid
Aluminium tube 30 mm fluid
Fig. 8. VOD vs inverse radius for aluminium connement left and pressure contour lines inside the
aluminium conner right.
The detonation velocities obtained with the uid
conner agree with those obtained with the elasticplastic conner at the largest charge radius rc 
99 mm. The detonation pressures at this radius are
much larger as the yield strength of aluminium and
the presence of elastic waves is not expected to play
a crucial role. Based on the results in Fig. 8 the
uid conner model can be regarded as a reasonable
approximation of the aluminium conner in predicting VOD if the connement is either thin 5 mm
or if the VOD is close to the ideal detonation velocity.
In the 30 mm conned charges the VOD discrepancy grows faster than in the 5 mm conned charges
with decreasing charge radius. This discrepancy is
not as large in the 5 mm conned charge because
the immediate expansion from the outer free surface
of the nite conner causes a strong plastic release
wave to travel back into the explosive. This plastic release is much stronger than the elastic release
and thus dominates the overall expansion process.
This plastic wave is present in both the uid and the
elastic-plastic models and so almost no VOD discrepancy is seen for the thinner conned charges.
The qualitative differences in pressure contours
between the uid and elastic-plastic conner model
for the rc  99 mm charge with 30 mm aluminium
connement are demonstrated in Fig. 9.
Distance behind front mm
Fig. 9. Pressure contour plot with the aluminium
interface black line for rc  99mm under 30 mm
connement. The uid conner dashed lines and
elastic-plastic solid lines are provided from 1 GPa
to 5 GPa at pressure intervals of 2 GPa.
The smooth pressure proles observed inside the
conner have also been reported in the analytical
work done by Sharpe and Bdzil8. The lack of elastic
waves in the uid model causes the internal energy
in the uid conner to be more localised which supports the detonation through an initial compression
stronger than for the elastic-plastic conner. This
effect also explains why the elastic-plastic conner
model predicts lower detonation velocities than the
Detonation shock-front proles
Detonation shock-front proles are extracted
from the numerical results and are shown in Fig. 10.
Distance behind front mm
Fig. 10. Detonation shock-front proles of ANFO
under 5 mm and 30 mm aluminium and steel
connement at various charge radii
In all investigated cases 5 mm and 30 mm steel
and aluminium connement the detonation fronts
remain convex in the central region even when
the ow becomes strongly subsonic in the conner. The front prole only becomes concave in
a small localised region close to the conner interface and this is most pronounced for aluminium
charges with 30 mm connement. The same qualitative detonation front behaviour was found in an
experimental study with ANFO conned by a nite aluminium casing2. The absence of completely concave detonation fronts can be related to
the porous nature of the explosive which causes the
weak shockscompression waves to travel slowly
from the conner into the unreacted explosive.
The front curvature under 30 mm connement
is smaller than for connement under 5 mm connement which also agrees with the experimental
observations2. When detonation front proles with
similar VOD are compared it is found that the central region has the same curvature but differences
increase towards the charge edge.
We note that the numerical results obtained in this
study could be used to quantify an effective edge
angle for DSD simulations3 as detonation front cur
1039
vatures remain convex despite detonation velocities
of ANFO as low as 1500 ms.
In stiff and unsteady conners energy is
found to ow ahead of the detonation wave via the
conner material and compresses the unreacted explosive in a thin layer in the vicinity of the conner. This behaviour ultimately supports the detonation wave if desensitisation effects are negligible. In the stiff connement the inward wall motion is smaller than in the unsteady connement
and the inward motion increases with connement
thickness. In both the stiff and unsteady cases
the expansion of the conner remains completely
smooth and no reverberation can be seen in the interface displacement in contrast to classical connement. The sensitivity of the detonation velocity to connement thickness is increased in stiff
and unsteady connement in comparison to classical connement. In agreement with experimental
evidence the detonation front proles were found
to remain convex even in the most non-ideal detonation conditions and the detonation front only
becomes concave in a localised region close to the
In addition it is found that the presence of elastic waves may be neglected close to ideal detonation conditions but is important close to the failure
radius and in detonation conditions with subsonic
and transonic ow in the conner. Interestingly the
predicted VOD given by the elastic-plastic conner
model is in each investigated case equal to or below the VOD prediction obtained with the uid conner model.
This project was kindly funded by ORICA. The
authors thank Dr Chan Dr Kirby and Dr Minchinton from ORICA for helpful discussions and for
providing experimental data for this project.
Modeling the Shock to Detonation Transition in PETN using CREST 
Mary-Ann Maheswaran John P. Curtis and John E. Reaugh 
Atomic Weapons Establishment 
Aldermaston Reading Berkshire RG7 4PR UK 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory  
PO Box 808 Livermore CA 94501 USA 
Abstract. A model for PETN is being developed using the CREST reactive burn model.  
It is also intended that this work should feed into the High Explosive Violent Response 
model HERMES for the purpose of explosive safety assessment and understanding ageing 
mechanisms.    The  CREST  reactive  burn  parameters  were  tuned  to  several  sets  of 
experimental data. CREST uses the snowplough model to account for the initial density of 
the explosive.  In the past this has only been within 90 of TMD.  The densities of PETN 
of interest to us are less than 80 of TMD.  The reaction rate parameters were tuned to 
published  experimental  wedge  test  data  and  in-material  manganin  gauge  data.    We 
demonstrate how certain reaction rate parameters affect the fit to experimental Pop-plot 
data.  This model is still in development and as such we were unable to find a single set of 
reaction rate parameters which fit the Pop-plots of PETN at all the required densities.  
Pure  PETN  is  a  white  granular  explosive 
widely  used  within  detonator  systems  and 
depending upon its use can be pressed to a wide 
range  of  densities  from  less  than  50  of  TMD 
theoretical  maximum  density  to  within  90  of 
TMD.    Like  many  explosives  PETN  becomes 
more  sensitive  at  lower  densities1  and  higher 
specific  surface  area  SSA2.    The  reaction  zone 
duration  of  detonating  PETN  has  been  inferred 
from Fabry-Perot studies of PETN close to TMD 
to  be  less  than  10ns3.    This  implies  that  the 
reaction rate of PETN is extremely fast compared 
with  secondary  explosives  such  as  HMX  or 
The aim of this work is to develop a model for 
the  Computational  Reaction 
Evolution  dependent  on  Entropy  S  and  Time 
CREST reactive burn model5.  It is also intended 
that this work should feed into the High Explosive 
Violent Response HEVR model HERMES High 
Explosive  Response  to  MEchanical  Stimulus 
which is capable of modeling SDT and DDT.  In 
addition HERMES uses CREST in regimes where 
the pressure of a burning explosive causes a shock 
to form.  HERMES has previously been used with 
success  in  modeling  DDT  in  the  HMX  based 
explosive  EDC376  where 
experiments  such  as  reverse  detonation  also 
called  retonation  were  reproduced.    In  future 
this work will help to develop a HERMES model 
characteristics  such  as  run  distance  curvature  of 
the  detonation  wave  and  dead  zones  are  some  of 
the effects which we aim to model correctly. 
CREST  has  previously  been  shown  to  be  a 
versatile  model  that  can  be  used  to  simulate  a 
phenomena.    A  variety  of  explosives  have  been 
modeled  using  CREST 
PBX95017  PBX95028  LX-179  and  UF-TATB.  
These explosives were modeled at densities within 
90  of  TMD  and  using  an  entropy  dependent 
reaction rate. CREST is based on the observation 
that  the  reaction  rate  depends  on  the  local  shock 
strength  which  led  to  the  conclusion  that  a 
function of entropy of the explosive determines the 
Whilst CREST has been shown to be accurate 
for  several  explosives  these  models  have  been 
constructed  using  a 
suite  of  high-fidelity 
experimental  data  for  SDT  and  detonation.    In 
particular the reaction rate model has been tuned to 
embedded  gauge  data  from  gas-gun  firings589.  
Pop-plots  at  a  given  density  provide  far  less 
calibrating  the  empirical  reaction  rate  equations. 
Handley has shown that CREST reaction rates can 
be tuned to reproduce particle velocity traces from 
gas-gun shots8.  A tuned reaction rate coefficient 
set should be suitable for all densities near TMD 
eliminating the need to re-calibrate parameters to a 
new density9.  However CREST has not yet been 
shown to scale to densities below 90 of TMD.   
than  embedded  gauge  data 
A  literature  review  found  experimental  data 
for  PETN  at  various  densities  in  terms  of  nonreacted Hugoniot data1101112.  There also includes 
significant  amounts  of  data  regarding  the  change 
in  detonation  pressure  and  velocity  with  PETN 
density  as  collated  by  Hornig  et  al.13  and  reanalyzed  by  Green  et  al.14.    However  there  is 
significantly less embedded gauge data needed to 
tune the CREST reaction rate parameters.  Wedge 
test  experiments  are  the  primary  source  of  data 
available for PETN shock initiation.  Wackerle et 
al.15 performed a series of Wedge test experiments 
of  PETN  at  1.75gcc  98.4  TMD  using  a  gasgun.  Further to this Stirpe et al. in an earlier study 
used  Wedge  tests  and  plane  wave  generators  to 
produce  Pop-plots  of  PETN  at  1.6gcc  and 
1.72gcc1.  The Pop-plot for PETN at 1.0gcc was 
found by Seay and Seely12 and at 1.4gcc is quoted 
in  the  Los  Alamos  explosive  manual  collated  by 
Gibbs  and  Popolato16.    In  addition  to  Pop-plot 
data  Manganin  gauge  data  has  been  reported  by 
Maienschein et al. for PETN at various densities17 
and Wackerle et al. have published a set of traces 
for PETN at 1.75gcc15.  It must be noted that if the 
experimental  data  in  the  literature  has  significant 
variations  in  crystal  sizes  this  complicates  the 
parameterization of the model as CREST does not 
take  into  account  microstructural  properties  of  an 
explosive such as particle size and morphology.  In 
particular  differences  in  specific  surface  area  are 
expected to change the sensitivity of the explosive.  
However  Pop-plot  data  for  PETN  at  1.0gcc12 
1.6gcc1  1.72gcc1  and  1.75gcc15  all  report  the 
same average specific surface area of 3000 cm2g 
experimental data has some consistency.  
Owing to the lack of embedded gauge data for 
PETN  available  to  us  this  work  faces  several 
challenges.    In  particular  this  study  explores 
whether CREST can be density scaled below 90 
TMD  and  whether  a  suitable  reaction  rate 
coefficient  set  can  be  found  using  only  Pop-plot 
data  at  several  densities  and  limited  manganin 
pressure gauge traces. 
This  paper  details  the  different  sub-models 
the  CREST  PETN  model 
including  the  non-reacted  EOS  the  reaction  rate 
model  and  the  detonation  products  EOS.    The 
investigation  explores  the  problem  space  when 
constructing  a  new  CREST  model  with  limited 
data particularly for the reaction rate model.  An 
initial CREST model is proposed with suggestions 
on how to improve future versions.   
Computational Setup 
performed  using  the  one-dimensional  Lagrangian 
hydrodynamics  code  PERUSE18. 
modeled in CREST using the snowplough model5.  
As  part  of  this  model  the  sound  speed  of  the 
porous  material  is  assumed  to  be  zero  when 
calculating the artificial viscosity.  The form of the 
artificial  viscosity  used  to  represent  a  shock 
discontinuity is defined as a combination of linear 
and  quadratic  viscosities19.  As 
component  of  the  artificial  viscosity  is  calculated 
using the sound speed setting the sound speed to 
zero  during  compaction  of  the  porous  material 
causes  oscillations  in  the  pressure  that  would 
otherwise be damped.  See reference 19 for more 
details.  As the porosity of the material increases 
the oscillations become quite significant as shown 
in Fig. 1.  It is clear that at 1.0gcc the oscillations 
in pressure become too extreme to ignore.  Plotting 
the CREST function of entropy parameter ZS see 
next section in profile along the mesh shows that 
oscillations of ZS extend to 0.5mm from the shock 
front.    Whitworth19 has proposed a resolution of 
this problem by finding the sound speed from the 
EOS upon compaction of the porous material.  But 
this  is only valid  for  small  variations  in porosity. 
Therefore  tuning  CREST  to  data  at  this  density 
was  not  attempted.    In  future  a  different  porosity 
model  such  as  the  P-  model  should  be  used  to 
eliminate this effect. 
Fig.  1.  Ringing  at  shock  arrival  due 
snowplough  porosity  model  becomes  extreme  at 
simulation was also investigated and it was found 
that  because  of  the  fast  reaction  rate  the  mesh 
resolution  needed  to  be  significantly  finer  than 
those  used  for  other  explosives  modeled  using 
CREST.    Fig.  2  compares  the  reaction  rate  and 
reaction  of  PETN  with  EDC37.  
Typically CREST requires a mesh resolution of at 
least 50 zones per mm19.  The PETN simulations 
run in this study required a mesh resolution of at 
least  600  zones  per  mm  before  being  fully  mesh 
Non-Reacted EOS for PETN 
The non-reacted EOS of PETN uses a similar 
form  as  the  CREST  EDC37  model5.    The  MieGrneisen  EOS 
isentrope as the reference curve20 
where  subscript  S  denotes  constant  entropy  P 
pressure  is the Grneisen gamma constant E is 
the  specific  energy  and  v  is  the  specific  volume.  
reference  curve  because  temperature  and  entropy 
can  be  easily  evaluated.    To  obtain  the  principal 
isentrope  Hugoniot  data  is  integrated  to  obtain 
Esv  and  Psv.      Fig.  3  summarizes  all  the 
experimental  data  used  to  find  an  expression  for 
the Hugoniot at TMD1011.  Many materials have a 
linear  shock  velocity  Us  -  particle  velocity  up 
relationship.    While  the  Us  -  up  Hugoniot  plot  in 
Fig. 3 appears slightly curved a linear fit produced 
a good R-squared fit of 0.961 whereas a cubic fit 
produced  an  R-squared  value  of  0.9701.    To 
simplify the model it was judged that a linear Us - 
up  relation  should  be  used  initially  and  further 
refinement  to  include  non-linear  forms  could  be 
undertaken in subsequent versions of this model if 
Fig.  3.    Fit  to  all  TMD  Hugoniot  data  for  PETN 
found in literature1011  
CREST  describes  the  principal  isentrope  in 
finite  strain  form20. 
  The  energy  along  the 
isentrope can be calculated directly from Hugoniot 
data using a numerical scheme.  On the principal 
Fig.  2.  Reaction  rates  of  PETN  compared  with 
EDC375 for a ZS of 0.002 Mb-cm3g 
Combining  equation  2  and  1  gives  the  first 
order differential equation for ES in v 
This  is  solved  using  a  Runge-Kutta  numerical 
  Once  ES  is  determined  then  PS  is 
readily  found  from  equations  2  and  3  thus 
isentrope.  CREST uses a polynomial function to 
describe the finite strain equation for the principal 
isentrope see Lambourn for further details20.   
the  derivation  of 
Although  the  PETN  model  developed  in  this 
work uses the same version of the Mie-Grneisen 
equation of state as is used by the EDC37 model5 
a  different  form  of  Grneisen  gamma  is  used.  
Lambourn20  uses  an  expression  to  describe  the 
change  in    as  a  function  of  specific  volume 
however in this work a constant value of 0.5675 is 
used  which  was  taken  from  the  Ignition  and 
Growth reactive burn model3.  The value of  is 
function  ZS  or  ZS  used  in  CREST  and 
therefore has an effect on the reaction rate.  ZS is 
found  using  the  integral  of    as  a  function  of 
specific volume called v.  This is an integrating 
factor in the ordinary differential equation for the 
specific energy20.  ZS can be defined as 
where  E  is  the  specific  internal  energy  of  the 
material.  Thermodynamic parameters found in the 
literature21  were  used  to  calculate  an  alternate 
value of   1.4425 this corresponds to the value 
this  value  did  not 
significantly change the reaction rate model results 
described later in this work. 
It  is  also  assumed  that  the  specific  heat  at 
constant volume stays fixed at 1x10-5 MbccgK as 
most  explosives  have  approximately  this  value21.  
Specific  heat  is  important  when  determining  the 
temperature of the material and also in temperature 
dependent  reaction  rates.    As  this  model  uses  an 
entropy dependent reaction rate cV does not have 
an  important  contribution  to  the  reaction  rate.  
Table  1  summarizes  the  non-reacted  CREST 
parameters used for PETN at TMD. 
Fig.  4  shows  that  the  TMD  non-reacted 
equation  of  state  combined  with  the  snowplough 
porosity model has a reasonable fit to the Hugoniot 
curves at lower densities in both the Us  up and 
pressure  specific volume planes.  However the 
experimental  data  for  PETN  at  1.4gcc  plotted  in 
the P-v plane shows an unexpected upward trend.  
This raises questions regarding the validity of the 
experimental data at this density and may suggest 
that  the  material  had  started  to  react  whilst  the 
measurements were taken. 
Table 1. Non-reacted equation of state parameters 
Hugoniot coefficient s 
Bulk sound speed c0 
Initial temperature T0 
Detonation Products Equation of State 
JWL  parameters  used  to  model  PETN  must 
represent  both  the  adiabatic  expansion  from  the 
Chapman-Jouget  detonation  state  CJ  and  the 
detonation  velocity 
and  pressure  whether 
measured  or  calculated  by  a  thermochemical 
equilibrium  code  such  as  Cheetah22.  The  use  of 
experiment to provide such a constraint on a JWL 
parameter set is somewhat problematic. Although 
gauges can be used to measure detonation velocity 
and  pressure  and  particle  velocity  histories  with 
precision  the  CJ  state  is  not  easily  identified 
because it arrives some time after the initial shock. 
We first built a tabular equation of state from 
Cheetah.  We  used  12  temperature  entries  and  56 
density entries. The temperatures were from 350 - 
10000K.  The  density  ranges  were  logarithmic 
with five entries per decade from 10-4 to 10-2gcc 
ten  entries  per  decade  from  10-2  to  1  gcc  and 
linear with entries every 0.1 gcc to the maximum 
density  3.5  gcc.  The 
reproduces  the  detonation  conditions  to  within 
about  0.3.    A  Cheetah  derived  table  could  also 
be  used  in  the  DDT  model  HERMES  in  future 
when modeling PETN. 
Fig. 4. Validation of non-reacted equation of state 
and snowplough model using experimental 
Hugoniot data in a Us  up plane b pressure  
specific volume plane1011. 
The  adiabat  from  the  CJ  conditions  was 
calculated with the table to a relative volume of 30 
at intervals of 0.05. The  parameter for the JWL 
equation  of  state  was  calculated  by  fitting  the 
adiabat  in  the  range  10V30  with  the  function 
CV1.  The constraint on the JWL parameters is 
that the sound speed at the CJ point can be defined 
The sound speed in general is also given by 
Along  the  CJ  adiabat  the  JWL  parameter  C  is 
The    parameter  is  determined  by  the  adiabat  at 
large  enough  values  of  volume  such 
parameters A and B become negligible.   
The parameter A can be described by 
The B R1 and R2 parameters were then fit to the 
full adiabat using equation 8 and the fixed value 
of . A least squares fit minimized the sum of the 
squared  fractional  differences  between  the  value 
calculated  from  the  CJ  isentrope  table  and  the 
value  calculated  with  the  JWL  parameters.  The 
fitted parameters are given in Table 2 for fits to the 
CJ  condition  at  relative  volume  50.    It  is  also 
instructive  to  observe  the  consequence  of  fitting 
JWL parameters at TMD and applying that EOS to 
different starting densities.   
Table 2 JWL parameters for PETN at given initial densities calculated using Cheetah 
Int. Det. Symp. 2006
and Hornig et al. 5th
Int. Det. Symp. 1970
far  as  the  authors  are  aware  there  is  no  particle 
velocity embedded gauge data available for PETN 
The  reaction  rate  selected  for  the  PETN 
CREST  model  has  the  same  functional  form  as 
used for the CREST EDC37 model5 
The parameters b1 and b2 are defined as 
The chosen reaction rate model for the EDC37 
model sets m1 to be zero so that the reaction rate is 
dominated  by  the  slow  reaction  rate  therefore 
significantly  reducing  the  number  of  coefficients 
needed to be tuned.  The reaction rate coefficients 
are therefore defined as 
This reduced form of the reaction rate model was 
chosen because of the lack of embedded gauge and 
rate  stick  data  which  can  be  used  to  tune  more 
complex  CREST  reaction  rate  models8  such  as 
those  used  for  PBX9502.    As  a  result  only  six 
parameters need to be tuned for this reaction rate 
The  CREST  MK1  EDC37  parameters5  were 
used  as  a  starting  point.    The  parameters  were 
systematically changed to fit PETN Pop-plot data 
and then these sets of parameters were applied to 
other  densities  to  see  if  the  parameters  were 
acceptable.  Through trial and error it was found 
that  all  six  parameters  affect  both  the  slope  and 
position  of  the  Pop-plot  to  varying  degrees.  
However  the  six  reaction  rate  parameters  can  be 
divided  into  two  groups  those  that  mainly  affect 
the  slope  of  the  Pop-plot  and  those  that  mainly 
affect  the  position.    The  parameters  which  affect 
the fit to the slope of the Pop-plot were the entropy 
powers  C1  C3  and  C11.    Whereas  the  remaining 
three  parameters  the  entropy  multipliers  C0  C2 
experimental  detonation  velocity  as  a  function  of 
We  show  the  calculated  detonation  velocity 
Fig.  5  and  detonation  pressure  Fig.  6  together 
with the experimental values reported in reference 
14.  Although the use of a single JWL equation of 
state  may  be  adequate  for  some  purposes 
particularly at high density it is apparent that more 
precise results are obtained when the JWL is fit to 
results for the density of interest using Cheetah. 
Int. Det. Symp. 2006
and Hornig et al. 5th
Int. Det. Symp. 1970
Fig. 6. Comparison of calculated and experimental 
detonation pressure as a function of density. 
Reaction Rate Model 
requires  quite  detailed 
information on the growth to detonation.  Handley 
has tuned CREST models to embedded gauge data 
from  gas-gun  shots589.    It  has  been  noticed  in 
the  past  that  whilst  the  Pop-plot  gives  some 
indication  of  the  run  to  detonation  it  does  not 
provide enough information about the shape of the 
reaction  rate  curve  with  respect  to  time.    This 
means that several sets of reaction rate coefficients 
can be used to fit one Pop-plot curve.  However as 
and C10 translate the Pop-plot and hence affect its 
that  changing  all 
parameters which affect the slope of the Pop-plot 
at  the  same  time  had  a  greater  effect  than  only 
changing  individual  parameters.    For  example 
changing  parameters  C1  C3  and  C11  together 
caused  the  slope  of  the  Pop-plot  to  vary  more 
significantly than only individually changing these 
  A  single  set  of  reaction  rate 
parameters  could  not  be  found  which  fit  all 
available Manganin gauge data for higher density 
PETN  was  added  to  the  reaction  rate  calibration 
The  CREST  parameters  were 
Manganin gauge data for PETN at 1.72gcc17 and 
1.75gcc15.  However it was noticed that a better 
overall  fit  to  the  Manganin  data  was  achieved 
using  a  third  order  reaction  rate  at  these  high 
The parameter b3 is defined as 
and the parameter m3 is set to the following values 
while m1 and m2 are both set to 0.  A third order 
reaction rate allows for a slower more narrow rise 
to  peak  reaction  rate  needed  to  fit  the  Manganin 
gauge data for both 1.72gcc and 1.75gcc.  
Fig. 7.  Fit to Manganin gauge data17 for PETN at 
Fig. 9 Application of the 1.72gcc reaction rate 
model to other densities 
Table 3 Final CREST reaction rate parameters for 
PETN at four different densities 
Second order reaction rate parameters from 
Parameter  Values for  
Third order reaction rate parameters from 
Parameter  Values for 
Fig. 8. Fit to Manganin gauge data15 for PETN at 
Even  after  achieving  a  reasonable  fit  to  the 
Manganin gauge data as shown in Fig. 7 and Fig. 
8  it  was  found  that  the  parameters  were  still  not 
density scaleable.  It was noticed that several sets 
of  parameters  will  fit  a  single  set  of  embedded 
gauge  traces.    Therefore  the  fact  that  a  density 
scaleable reaction rate could not be found suggests 
that more embedded gauge data is needed to find a 
density  scaleable  reaction  rate  coefficient  set  for 
PETN.    However  it  was  observed  that  when  the 
parameters found from fitting to Manganin gauge 
data  were  used  to  predict  the  Pop-plot  a  good 
agreement  could  be  observed  for  the  respective 
density as shown in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10. 
Reasonable  fits  to  experimental  data  at  lower 
densities  were  achieved  for  both  the  non-reacted 
solid  and  gaseous  detonation  products.    If  the 
reaction  rate  model  is  not  correctly  capturing  the 
shape of the reaction rate curve for a given density 
this would explain why a good fit to Pop-plot data 
at that density was not found.  This suggests that 
the  shape  of  the  reaction  rate  curve  may  alter 
significantly between PETN densities.   
It  must  be  noted  that  CREST  does  not  take 
into account mesoscale properties of an explosive 
such as grain size and morphology.  Even though 
the  majority  of  the  experimental  data  has  been 
reported to be the same specific surface area there 
may  still  be  microstructural  differences  which  a 
porosity model alone could not take into account.  
The possibility that an entropy based reaction rate 
model  maybe insufficient for PETN must also be 
investigated.  Therefore 
developed in this study should be considered still 
experimental data is available.   
Many  thanks  to  Caroline  Handley  Brian 
Lambourn  Nick  Whitworth  and  Hugh  James  for 
discussions on improvements to the CREST PETN 
model.    JERs  activity  was  performed  under  the 
auspices of the US DOE by LLNL under Contract 
DE-AC52-07NA27344  and  partially  funded  by 
the  Joint  US  DoDDOE  Munitions  Technology 
Development Program. On the existence and stability of double-front detonations
S. SM. Lau-Chapdelaine J. Tang F. Zhang M. I. Radulescu
Department of Mechanical Engineering University of Ottawa Ottawa ON Canada K1N 6N5
Defense Research and Development Canada - Sufeld Medicine Hat AB Canada T1A 8K6
Abstract. This study addresses the stability of sonic points and the origin of internal shocks
in double-front detonations using Ficketts detonation analogue.
Detonations with multiple disparate reactions and losses have been shown to permit multiple quasi-steady detonation velocities. Detonations where these velocities are equal are
investigated numerically. Simulations are initiated with the predicted steady-states solutions and prove to be unstable generating internal shock waves. Only sonic points with
characteristics diverging on either side are found to be stable. As a consequence two sonic
points can only exist in a stable manner if they are separated by an shock wave. Internal shocks were only transient in simulations however this may be a consequence of the
Hybrid detonations are self-sustained detonation
waves in mixtures of reactive gases with suspended
reactive dust. Since the reaction of both phases
can be exothermic the detonation wave can be sustained by either one or both energy release steps.
Experiments and numerical simulations have shown
that the selection rules and detonation wave pressure proles depend intimately on the kinetics of
the reactions in either phase the amount of energy
release and hydrodynamic resistance of the particles to the gas phase motion Zhangs recent review
provides the state-of-the-art1. Typically the solid
phase is entrained by the shocked gas phase which
usually also reacts faster. The solid phase extracts
momentum via drag forces and energy via heat
conduction and work done by drag forces from the
The competition between heat addition and en
ergy loss dictates the structure of the self-sustained
wave. At so-called generalized Chapman-Jouget
CJ conditions with zero net thermicity forward
facing characteristics do not amplify and can thus
serve as limiting characteristics.
steady travelling detonation solutions can be established when these sonic planes propagate at precisely the speed of the lead shock given by the accumulated energy release between the two surfaces.
In systems where many reactions occur separately from each other but concurrently with losses
of which hybrid detonations are a subclass several
zero-thermicity points can exist at locations where
the exothermic reactions balance the losses. This allows for situations where the sonic planes propagate
at different speeds and for multiple detonation velocities. Bdzil et al.2 studied detonations with two
reactions of disparate rates in the presence of losses.
They found a range of conditions where a detonation would suddenly accelerate from a quasi-steady
propagation velocity to a faster one. Using Ficketts detonation analogue Radulescu et al.3 found
that detonations may propagate at speeds associated
with intermediate velocities but will settle with the
fastest as the slower sonic planes are overtaken.
The case where the two sonic planes propagate at
the same velocity is much more complex and poorly
understood. Experiments and simulations in hybrid
systems 1 4 5 6 7 have suggested that a double reaction zone structure is possible with an embedded shock located between two sonic planes. These
have been labelled as double front detonations. It
is presently unclear if such a shock is stable if it
depends on external losses as modelled by previous
authors or is dependent on other three-dimensional
effects in the experiments.
The scope of the present work is to determine the
wave structure of such double-structure detonations
and study their stability. The rst step of the investigation is based on previous work3 using the Fickett
detonation model to study hybrid detonations. Using this simplied mathematical model parameters
permitting two sonic points propagating at the same
speed can be identied analytically. The structure
of the steady state solution is then determined. Its
stability is investigated via non-linear analysis using the method of characteristics. Solutions with
embedded shocks can thus be identied. Unsteady
numerical simulations then permit to test the conclusions reached starting with initially under-driven
or steady-state conditions.
This paper rst introduces the model used for
the investigation. The exact steady solution of the
model is presented and analysed in the following
two sections. Unsteady numerical simulations of
the model are then studied ve simulations initiated with an under-driven piston and four possible
steady-state solutions are conducted in order to determine stability. The results are then discussed and
conclusions are drawn.
Ficketts model with two generalized CJ points
The model introduced by Radulescu et al.3 is
based on the reactive form of Burgers equation introduced earlier by Fickett8 9. The model is an analogue of detonations it neglects rear-facing pressure waves simplifying the mathematical complexity of the system while retaining the important
physics of reactive compressible ows and their dynamics. The hydrodynamic model is
where x is a Lagrangian coordinate t is time  represents density and p represents pressure. In this
study the equation of state
is used where i are the reaction progress variables.
The variables Qi represent the heat release when
positive and a loss when negative. Two exothermic
r1r2 reactions and one loss r3 are considered
with state-independent rates ri
r2  t2  k21  22  and
where ki are scaling constants and i represent
the reaction orders. The reaction progress variables range from zero unreacted to one reacted.
The rst exothermic reaction and the heat loss represented by 1 and 3 respectively begin once
shocked while the second reaction begins upon
completion of the rst reaction.
Initial conditions ahead of the wave are uniform
taking the values pi  i  i  0 for simplicity
and without loss of generality.
The parameters used in this study are listed in ta
ble 1.
The steady wave structure
Seeking the steady structure of the travelling
wave solution the spatial variable is changed to a
shock xed frame   x  Dt for a detonation
travelling with constant velocity D. The hydrodynamic equation 1 and reaction rate equations 3
can then be transformed into a set of ordinary differential equations
Table 1 Parameter set used in study
Integrating these equations yields the analytical results for the steady wave structure
cid118cid117cid117cid116D2 
with i indicating where the reactions begin thus
The travelling wave solution is isolated from the
back when the limiting characteristic travels parallel
to the steady lead shock i.e. when dxdt  CJ 
D this is the sonic criterion. For this limiting characteristic to travel at constant speed the density differential equation 4 requires vanishing thermicity
i riQi. Thus the generalized Chapman-Jouget
condition denoted with the subscript CJ requires
The solution exhibits sonic points with respect
to the front at any point where   D. The relation between the detonation speed and the reaction
evaluated along the limiting characteristic is obtained from the analytical density relation 5 when
the generalized CJ condition 9 is met and is
This expression illustrates that the detonation velocity for the solution with sonic points is given by the
net energy evolved from the lead shock to the sonic
The second portion of the generalized CJ condition 9 balance of the reaction rates permits the
Fig. 1 Family of steady integral curves for a detonation travelling from left to right with parameters
found in table 1 1 CJ point and DA  DB
reaction progress values along the limiting characteristic iCJ to be established. Since the exothermic reactions 1 and 2 are sequential the balance of
rates must occur between either the 1st and 3rd reaction or the 2nd and 3rd reaction i.e. r1CJ  r3CJ
or r2CJ  r3CJ. Denoting these sonic points as A
and B respectively two solutions can be obtained3
for the reaction progress variables iA and iB at
the points where the CJ condition is met as well as
the locations A and B of these points.
The solution is now complete for the detonation
speed and reaction zone structure in closed algebraic forms.
Steady analytical results
The steady analytical case where DA  DB has
been investigated by Radulescu et al.3 and is summarized here. Figure 1 shows the four families of
integral curves investigated for the parameters listed
in table 1 with one CJ point. The integral curves
begin at the shock with a value of  given by the
inert shock jump conditions in Burgers equation
  2D and proceed towards the burned side.
A steady shock velocity D is chosen paying at
1054
00.20.40.60.811.2-8-7-6-5-4-3-2-10 x - D tzone 12zone 3zone 4zone 5BADDBDDBDDADDAstrong solutionweak solutiontention to its relation to DB and DA. When D 
DB the integral curve top most curve in gure 1
does not intersect any sonic point this is the overdriven solution which requires the rear boundary be
maintained at the corresponding value. The evolution of  is non-monotonous.
For a detonation speed corresponding to the
largest eigenvalue i.e. D  DB in this case a
sonic point appears only at the rear point B. Note
that this sonic point is a saddle point and both weak
and strong solutions can be attained in the back depending on the rear boundary conditions. This is the
typical behaviour of pathological detonations and
is well discussed by Fickett 9.
When D  DA the sonic point occurs at point A.
Note that the integral curves corresponding to this
solution terminate at a singularity.
of an unsteady solution this signies that a shock
wave will form at the rear and eventually catch up
to the lead shock. It can thus be asserted that the
smaller eigenvalue is not stable but can be established as an intermediate transient.
For detonation speeds lower than both eigenvalues a steady solution does not exist owing to the
singularity established in the reaction zone signifying the presence of a strong compression wave in
the unsteady case. The equilibrium solution where
the detonation velocity is determined by the total
heat release is thus not possible.
For conditions where DA  DB the largest
eigenvalue DA corresponds to the singularity free
The possibility of two sonic points coexisting in
a steady solution is also present for a select parameter range such that DA  DB  DAB . This solution corresponds to a single integral curve passing through two saddle points as shown in gure
2. Parameters required for two simultaneous sonic
points need to satisfy a single constraint in the arbitrary choice of parameters with a solution in closed
form. Table 1 lists the modication in the second
heat release for example required to achieve this
condition. The solution obtained also admits steady
shock waves anywhere in the reaction zone structure. Since the shock speed in the Burgers and
Ficketts model is simply given by the average of
left and right states such shocks will travel exactly
at the leading shock strength. However the require
Fig. 2 Family of steady integral curves for a detonation travelling from left to right with parameters
found in table 1 2 CJ points and DA  DB 
ment that the shock be forward facing impossibility
of expansion shocks requires these shocks to be behind any sonic point as only there can a jump from
the weak to the strong solution exist.
Unsteady numerical method
The hydrodynamic equation 1 was numerically
approximated using rst-order upwind differencing
Eulers method in both time and space in the Eulerian frame of reference. The method has been explained by Tang10.
An adaptive domain was used where cells were
dynamically added ahead of the shock while cells
at the rear were removed once all reactions had terminated.
Grid spacing was uniform with x  1500.
Time step size was determined using the CourantFriedrichs-Lewy CFL condition such that CFL 
0.5  xt  max. A reaction threshold of
  0.001 was set to prevent unshocked gas from
Unsteady numerical results
Single steady CJ point
An example of the unsteady evolution of pistoninitiated detonations for conditions where the second sonic surface is slightly faster than the rst i.e.
DB  DA has previously been shown by Radulescu et al.3. They found that an internal shock
zone 12zone 3zone 4zone 5BADDABDDABDDABstrong solutionweak solution00.20.40.60.811.2-8-7-6-5-4-3-2-10 x - D tis formed following the formation of a detonation
propagating at speed DA. This internal shock travels faster than the sonic surface A thus penetrating
the rst reaction zone. A truly steady detonation is
eventually established travelling with a speed corresponding to the largest predicted eigenvalue DB
and with a new corresponding sonic surface B as
Two simultaneously steady CJ points
A modication in the second heat release listed
in table 1 was made as discussed in the steady analytical results section in order to allow for two
simultaneous steady sonic points. The possible integral curves for this example connecting the quiescent gas to rear conditions are shown in gure 2
The piston-initiated detonation of the double
sonic point solution with the same piston velocity
of 0.35 used by Radulescu et al.3 is qualitatively
similar to the single sonic point case previously discussed. The steady state contained only a single
sonic point as opposed to the two predicted by the
integral curves. This is discrepancy is reviewed in
The case with two simultaneous sonic points was
also studied using the predicted steady-state solutions as initial conditions to the unsteady simulations. All steady states start   0 in the strong
regime since the detonation is lead by a shock. Two
options are available to the ow following each
sonic point either the strong or weak solution making for four possible steady states. This number is
increased by the possibility of shocks joining the
weak and strong solutions.
The internally shock-free initial steady-state
curves will be referred to with an abbreviated notation. This notation will break the ow prole into
the rear solution the solution between the sonic points and the solution behind the
leading shock. A strong solution will be described
with the letter S while the weak solution will be described with the letter W. For example WWS would
refer to a detonation whose rear boundary is the
weak solution has the weak solution between sonic
points and necessarily the strong solution behind
the leading shock. The WWS initial condition can
The stability of the WWS solution is shown in
gure 3a. The rst simulation was initiated with
the WWS integral curve described in the previous
paragraph the exact WWS solution was imposed on
the domain at t  0 then was numerically evolved
through time. This solution can be achieved naturally with an under-driven piston.
Simulations initiated with internal shock waves
behaved in the same manner as those which evolved
shocks on their own and are therefore not reviewed.
Descriptions refer to the detonation-front frame
Following initiation a disturbance travels rearwards from the valley at the boundary of zones 2
and 3. A shock forms at the sonic point B seen in
gure 3b following the arrival of the disturbance
eventually annihilating sonic point A and catching
up to the front. During this transit the detonation
is slightly under-driven while the nal result is a
detonation which is slightly over-driven with a single sonic point at B looking qualitatively similar to
case D  DB in gure 1.
The next simulation was initiated with the SWS
integral curve shown in gure 4a. The evolution is
shown in gures 4 and 5. Once again a disturbance
appears at the valley at the interface of zones 2 and
3 and travels backwards until it reaches sonic point
B where it creates a shock between the two sonic
points. The shock links the supersonic ow weak
solution behind the sonic point A to a subsonic
state strong solution ahead of point B. Subsonic
ow now surrounds point B which is slightly overdriven until later time. The internal shock catches
up to the detonation front in the same manner as
described in the WWS case. A new shock is then
created downstream of sonic point B and adjusts the
ow to match the rear boundary condition. This new
shock wave slowly distances itself from the front.
The same sequence of events can be deduced
from the characteristic diagram in gure 5. It shows
that initially characteristics converge at sonic point
B and diverge at sonic point A. The shock can be
seen travelling forward overtaking sonic point A
and the detonation front while point B is overdriven. Between t  380 and t  390 point B once
again becomes sonic and a new shock is formed
as previously described and characteristics now diverge at sonic point B.
a Initial condition t  0
a Initial condition t  0
b A shock forms and travels forward after a disturbance
reaches point B t  44.6881
b A shock forms and travels forward after a disturbance
reaches point B t  140.169
Fig. 3 Wave proles for WWS steady-stateinitiated detonation for the double sonic point case
Again the detonation is slightly under-driven before the internal shock arrives at the front after
which it is slightly over-driven looking qualitatively similar to case D  DB in gure 1.
A simulation is now initiated with the SSS integral curve shown in gure 6a where the strong solution is maintained throughout.
The ow variable  initially uctuates at point
B after which a shock wave behind sonic point B
is formed to adjust the ow to the rear boundary
conditions and behaves as it did in the SWS case.
The detonation becomes slightly over-driven immediately upon initiation resulting in the ow eld
The fourth possibility with the WSS initial con
c A shock is formed at point B moving rearwards and
point A is over-driven t  449.865
Fig. 4 Wave proles for SWS steady-state-initiated
detonation for the double sonic point case
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2-8-7-6-5-4-3-2-1 0 1 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1t0123D 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2-8-7-6-5-4-3-2-1 0 1 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1t44.6881123D 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2-8-7-6-5-4-3-2-1 0 1 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1t0123D 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2-8-7-6-5-4-3-2-1 0 1 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1t140.169123D 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2-8-7-6-5-4-3-2-1 0 1 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1t449.865123Da Initial condition t  0
b A shock is formed at point B moving rearwards t 
Fig. 6 Wave proles for SSS steady-state-initiated
detonation for the double sonic point case
dition is not shown due to its simplicity. The solution immediately drifts towards a case qualitatively
similar to D  DB in gure 1 and is again slightly
The piston initiation of a detonation with parameters allowing only for a single steady CJ point
shown by Radulescu et al.3 agree well with the
steady integral curves. As the detonation front accelerates away from the piston face it begins with
a velocity D  DA  DB. The detonation velocity temporarily stabilizes when D  DA as the
creation of sonic point A stops signals from the rear
boundary from affecting the front. A shock forms
Fig. 5 Characteristic digram for a SWS steadystate-initiated detonation for the double sonic point
case shown in gure 4 time between 150 and 300
is omitted in favour of clarity
 300 320 340 360 380 400 420 440-3-2.5-2-1.5-1-0.5 0t 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140-3-2.5-2-1.5-1-0.5 0t 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2-8-7-6-5-4-3-2-1 0 1 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1t0123D 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2-8-7-6-5-4-3-2-1 0 1 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1t99.7859123Dbehind this sonic point as predicted by the singularity in the integral curve. Sonic point B is then
created behind the shock. During the transient of
the internal shock both sonic points A and B coexist. The internal shock eventually reaches the detonation front accelerating it to D  DB and the
detonation continues steadily with the single sonic
point predicted in the integral curves. Changing
the parameters to allow for two steady CJ points
D  DA  DB  DAB results in the same sequence of events however this does not lead to the
predicted integral curve seen in gure 2.
Unsteady simulations were initiated with the predicted steady integral curves to understand the discrepancy however none of the steady proles have
proved to be stable as they all nished with a single
CJ point at point B similar to case D  DB in gure 1 instead of the two predicted CJ points. The
formation of internal shocks when created always
occurred at a sonic point indicating that these sonic
points may be unstable.
The four different sonic point possibilities will
be labelled with a method congruent to that used
above to name steady-state solutions sonic points
lying between two weak solutions e.g. point B in
the WWS-initiated simulations gure 3a will be
called a sonic point of type WW. Likewise a sonic
point between two strong solutions is of type SS
a sonic point with a strong upstream solution and
weak downstream solution is of type WS and a
weak upstream and strong downstream solution is
of type SW. The top frames of gure 7 serve as illustrations.
All simulations initiated with steady integral
curves resulted in the creation of internal shocks
with the exception of the WSS initial curve. Additionally sonic point B was always the source of
these shocks. As for point A it quickly became
over-driven when of type SS but remained stable
until shocked when it was of type WS. It appears
sonic points of type WS always remained stable until shocked while the others were unstable.
The method of characteristics was used near the
two sonic points to assess their stability. Consider
the ow in the vicinity of a sonic point at steady
state illustrated in gure 7. The top frames consist
of the ow property  which can be interpreted as
both the local velocity and speed of sound in Fick
etts analogy. The middle frame shows the corresponding instantaneous characteristics or information paths. The bottom frame shows the resulting
ow property  after a period of time. The limiting characteristic vertical line in the middle frame
travels along the sonic point at the same speed as
the detonation front. For the strong solution when
  D information from the rear left is able to
reach the limiting characteristic as information to
the right travels faster than the front and is hence
subsonic with respect to the detonation these characteristics are right travelling. For the weak solution
  D information cannot keep up with the front
and is therefore carried towards the left in the detonation frame away from the limiting characteristic
supersonic. The characteristics slope depends on
For a sonic point of type WW gure 7a the characteristic diagram shows that perturbations downstream of the sonic point will be dissipated to the
rear as the information speed increases in that direction. On upstream side perturbations will accumulate and eventually disturb the sonic point. If
the perturbation immediately upstream of the sonic
point forces the ow property  to become larger
than D i.e. adopt the strong solution just ahead of
the sonic point a shock wave must be formed to
link the weak upstream solution to the new strong
solution just ahead of the sonic point. Flow immediately upstream of the sonic point now satises the
strong solution while maintaining the weak solution
downstream of the sonic point. The sonic point of
type WW has created an upstream shock and transitioned to a sonic of type WS as seen in the bottom
Likewise a sonic point of type SS gure 7b
will have upstream perturbations dissipated while
those downstream will accumulate. If the perturbation causes   D a downstream shock is created
to join the new weak solution immediately downstream of the sonic point to the strong solution further to the rear. A sonic point of type WS now exists connecting the strong upstream solution to the
new weak solution behind the sonic point.
Sonic points of type SW shown in gure 7c are
also unstable. Perturbations accumulate on either
side. An upstream perturbation acts in the same way
as for a type WW sonic point and a downstream
a Type WW sonic point
gives rise to an upstream
b Type SS sonic point
gives rise to a downstream
c Type SW sonic point
gives rise to shocks on either side
d Type WS sonic point remains stable
Fig. 7 Illustration of ow in vicinity of a sonic point initial ow property  top initial instantaneous
characteristics middle and resulting ow property  bottom
perturbation in the same manner as for a type SS
sonic point. Two shocks are created one upstream
and the other downstream and the sonic point transforms to a type WS sonic point.
Finally in a type WS sonic point gure 7d the
characteristic diagram shows that perturbations on
either side of the limiting characteristic are dissipated away from the sonic point explaining the stability seen in the simulations.
From this analysis it is expected that only the
sonic points of type WS where the characteristic
paths diverge on either side are stable. The rest
should transform to create shocks and a stable
sonic point of type WS. This leads to a further consequence in order for two sonic points to coexist
they must be separated by a shock wave.
In these simulations internal shocks between the
sonic points eventually reached sonic point A and
accelerated the detonation front. This instability is
ascribed to a feature of the model whereby any
position of the internal shock placed between the
two sonic points is possible. The detonation ve
locity was also found to be slightly under-driven
D  DAB while point A was sonic and slightly
over-driven after. The lack of sonic condition at
point A at the end of simulations is caused by detonation over-drive. This could to be due to numerical diffusion effects and needs to be further investigated. Otherwise it is expected that a type SS sonic
point at A would cast an internal shock backwards
between the two sonic points which would then both
In under-driven piston-initiated hybrid detonations which allow for two coexisting steady sonic
points sonic point B matching the generalized CJ
criterion will appear once the detonation achieves
the steady velocity D  DA  DAB dictated by
the rst sonic point. The second sonic point will
necessarily be of the unstable type WW.
Unsteady solutions of double sonic point congurations initiated with under-driven conditions and
DDeventually changes intoDDeventually changes intoDDeventually changes intoDDeventually changes intoDwith the predicted steady-state solutions proved to
be unstable. Internal shock waves were generated
between the two sonic planes and a third shock located behind the second sonic plane formed if the
rear boundary conditions supported it.
Only sonic points with diverging characteristics
were found to be stable. An internal shock is therefore required for two stable sonic points to coexist
in a detonation. This claries the roots of double
front detonations seen in previous work.
Internal shocks when formed eventually overtook the rst sonic plane joined and accelerated
the detonation front. The model features the ability to accommodate shocks anywhere behind sonic
points. In these simulations it resulted in moving
internal shocks and gave rise to viscous-like structures at point A. It is expected a shock would be
maintained between the sonic points were it not the
case. The results illustrate that solutions with multiple solutions may be unstable11 12. Additional investigation is required by expanding the model to
allow for non-numerical viscous effects for example.
3. Radulescu M. Tang J. and Zhang F. Multiplicity of detonation regimes in systems with
a multi-peaked thermicity. Part 1 Ficketts detonation analogue in Proceedings of the 24th
International Colloquium on the Dynamics of
Explosions and Reactive Systems Taipei Taiwan 2013.
Detonation in reactive solid
particle-gas ow Journal of propulsion and
power Vol. 22 pp. 12891309 2006.
5. Veyssiere B. and Khasainov B. Structure and
multiplicity of detonation regimes in heterogeneous hybrid mixtures Shock Waves Vol. 4
6. Afanasieva E. Levin V. and Tunik Y. V.
medium Shock Waves Explosions and
Detonations AIAA Progress in Astronautics
and Aeronauticsedited by JR Bowen N.
Manson AK Oppenheim and RI SoloukhinExplosive Fragmentation of Liquids in Spherical  
Alec M. Milne Aaron W. Longbottom David L. Frost Jason Loiseau Samuel Goroshin  
Fluid Gravity Engineering Ltd. St. Andrews Fife UK KY16 8YG 
McGill University Mechanical Engineering Dept. Montreal QC Canada H3A 0C3 
Carleton University Mechanical and Aerospace Eng. Ottawa ON Canada K1S 5B6 
University of St. Andrews Mathematical Institute St. Andrews UK KY16 9SS  
Abstract. Rapid acceleration of a spherical shell of liquid following detonation of a high 
explosive causes the liquid to form fine jets that are similar in appearance to the particle 
jets  that are  formed  during  explosive  dispersal  of  a  packed  layer  of  solid  particles.  Of 
particular interest is determining the dependence of the scale of the jet-like structures on 
the  physical  parameters  of  the  system  including  the  fluid  properties  e.g.  density 
viscosity surface tension and the ratio of the mass of the liquid to that of the explosive.  
The  present  paper  presents  computational  results  from  a  multimaterial  hydrocode 
describing the dynamics of the explosive dispersal process.  The computations are used to 
track the overall features of the dispersal of the liquid layer including the wave dynamics 
and motion of the spall and accretion layers.  The results are compared with experimental 
results  with  spherical  charges  containing  a  variety  of  different  fluids  including  water 
glycerol ethanol and vegetable oil which together encompass a significant range of fluid 
properties.  The results show that the number of jet structures is not sensitive to the fluid 
properties  but  primarily  dependent  on  the  mass  ratio.    Above  a  certain  mass  ratio  of 
liquid  fill to  explosive  burster  FB  the number  of  jets  is  approximately  constant  and 
consistent  with  an  empirical  model  based  on  the  maximum  thickness  of  the  accretion 
layer.    For  small  values  of  FB  the number  of  liquid  jets  is  reduced  in  contrast  with 
explosive powder dispersal where small FB yields a larger number of particle jets.  
Detonation of a central high explosive charge 
surrounded  by  a  shell  of  material  is  a  common 
practical  geometry  in  many  application  areas 
where  the  physics  of  the  interaction  of  the 
detonation with the surrounding material continues 
to be studied.  These areas include blast mitigation 
fuel-air  explosions  metalized  explosives  and 
reactive casings. In this paper we consider a shell 
of  liquid  surrounding  an  explosive  charge  in 
spherical geometry.   
The  behaviour  following  the  detonation  of  a 
high explosive charge underwater has been studied 
in detail for many  years see  for example Cole1.  
A  detonation  in  deep  water  can  be  considered  as 
the  case  of  a  shell  of  water  of  infinite  thickness 
and  in  these  conditions  one  observes  the  growth 
and oscillation of a stable gas bubble. There have 
been many examples of this phenomenon and we 
illustrate this behaviour in Fig. 1 with some recent 
results  kindly  supplied  to  us  by  Kirkpatrick  and 
Fig.  1.  Underwater  bubble 
detonation of 10 g aluminized explosive charge in 
thin  plastic  case  in  a  cylindrical  tank  at  various 
times left to right top to bottom. 
In  this  figure  one  can  see  the  detonation 
followed  by  an  initial  expansion  where  some 
is  observed  which  may 
correspond  to  case  effects  but  at  later  times  one 
can observe the smooth and stable gas globe which 
is  characteristic  of  this  phase  of  an  underwater 
If  we  consider  a  shell  of  water  with  a  finite 
thickness  the  introduction  of  an  outer  boundary 
changes the stability  of the system.  In this case 
the  outer  liquid  surface  is  no  longer  stable  and 
forms  jet-like  structures  suggesting  strongly  that 
wave interactions from the outer boundary play a 
key role in the observed break-up process.   
  Milne  et  al.34  have  noted  that  during  the 
dispersal  of  both 
experimental  evidence  from  a  wide  range  of 
the  expanding  cloud  of 
explosively disseminated material is comprised of 
particles  or  fragments  which have  significantly 
different  dimensions  from  those  associated  with 
the original material. Photographic evidence shows 
expanding fragments.  Examples of the formation 
of  these  jet  structures  are  given  for  example  in 
liquid  and  particle 
the  outer  boundary  reaches 
Frost et al.5 and Ripley and Zhang6 or in Frost and 
Zhang7  in  the  context  of  jet  formation  from 
heterogeneous  blast  explosives.  X-ray  analysis  of 
these  systems  has  allowed  Milne  et  al.4  to  show 
that the fragmentation process occurs early in the 
expansion  around the  time  that the release  wave 
the  surrounding  material.  They 
showed that the number of fragments observed in 
the  early  time  radiographs  and  in  the  late  time 
photographic  evidence  are  in  good  agreement.  A 
simple  model  to  predict  the number  of  jets  from 
powders was proposed. 
Explosive acceleration of a liquid shell differs 
the  corresponding  situation  with  solid 
particles  due  to  the  presence  of  voids  in  the 
unperturbed  particle  bed.    In  the  latter  case  the 
shock  propagating  through  the  particles  causes 
considerable  compaction  and  depending  on  the 
ductility  of  the  particles  the  compacted  bed  may 
considerable  strength  after  compaction.    In  the 
case of shock loading of a liquid the reflection of 
an  expansion  wave  at  the  liquid  surface  and 
subsequent tension applied to the bulk liquid will 
lead to cavitation and the formation of void growth 
and subsequent breakup of the bubbly liquid into a 
Explosive  dispersal  of  a  liquid  progresses 
through several regimes.  In the first regime which 
has  been  termed  the  ejection  regime9  the  forces 
associated with the propagation of the shock wave 
through the liquid and rarefaction that returns from 
the liquid surface dominate the motion of the fluid.  
This  is  followed  by  a  transition regime  in  which 
aerodynamic  forces  on  the  liquid.    In  the  final 
regime  the  shock  forces  have  decayed  and  the 
aerodynamic  drag  and  droplet  breakup  is  due  to 
the  competition  between 
inertial  and  surface 
The present work is concerned with the nearfield ejection regime which occurs on a timescale 
of  100s  of  microseconds  where  shock  forces 
dominate.  Of particular interest is determining the 
dependence  of  the  scale  of  the  jet-like  structures 
the  fluid  properties  e.g.  density 
viscosity surface tension and the ratio of the mass 
the  physical  parameters  of 
of the liquid to that of the explosive.  The number 
of liquid jets that are formed and the rate of droplet 
shedding and subsequent evaporation of the liquid 
will  determine  the  size  of  the  liquid-vapour-air 
cloud that is ultimately formed which is of interest 
if the liquid is combustible. 
In  the  present  paper  the  dynamics  of  the 
explosive  dispersal  process  of  a 
investigated with a multimaterial hydrocode.  The 
computations are used to track the features of the 
process including the wave dynamics and motion 
of  the  spall  and  accretion  layers.  A  working 
hypothesis for dynamic liquid breakup is proposed 
in which the maximum thickness of the accretion 
hypothesis  is  examined  in  light  of  experimental 
results with spherical charges containing a variety 
of  different  fluids  to  determine  the  influence  of 
fluid properties.  Water was chosen as a baseline 
fluid  and  other  liquids  were  chosen  that  have 
significant variations in fluid properties including 
glycerol  similar  density  and  surface  tension  to 
water  but  much  higher  viscosity  vegetable  oil 
similar density to water but higher viscosity and 
tension  and  ethanol  similar 
density  and  viscosity  to  water  but  lower  surface 
experimental  and  computational  results  existing 
theoretical  models  describing 
fragmentation of liquids will first be considered. 
Theoretical Models of Liquid Breakup 
The  dynamic  breakup  of  liquids  has  been 
considered theoretically by Grady10.  He found that 
energy-limited  spall  in liquids  was  dominated  by 
surface  energy  effects  at  low  strain  rates  and  by 
viscous  dissipation  at  high  rates.    He  also  noted 
that  there  exists  relatively  little  experimental 
information for liquid spall. His model can be used 
to  estimate  the  order  of  magnitude  of  the  liquid 
fragment or jet size.  Let us compare these results 
with  the  Grady  model  to  determine  estimates  for  
fragment size  and thus number. 
The Grady model predicts fragment values in 
two limits namely surface tension dominated and 
viscous dissipation dominated. Which mechanism 
is dominant is determined by the spall strength. As 
both  surface  tension  and  viscosity  can  act  to 
stabilize the break-up of the other the argument is 
the  presentation  of 
that the dominant mechanism in any situation will 
be the one with the largest spall strength. 
Effect of Surface Tension 
Grady model predicts the fragment size s 
For  surface  tension  dominated  problems  the 
where  is the surface tension  is the density and 
H is the local strain rate.  
Effect of Viscosity 
model gives fragment size s 
For  viscous  dominated  problems  the  Grady 
where  is the viscosity. 
The  implications  of  the  theoretical  model 
predictions  will  be  considered  by  comparing  the 
breakup of liquids that have a large difference in 
viscosity  i.e.  water  and  glycerol  in  the  next 
Experimental Results  
Experiments  were  carried  out  with  three 
different  sized  spherical  glass  casings  with 
volumes of about 2.8 1.0 and 0.4 L respectively.  
The largest casing was a thick-walled 3 mm thick 
glass  sphere  whereas  the  smaller  two  charges 
consisted  of  thin-walled  1  mm  thick  glass 
spheres prepared by removing the filaments from 
commercial  globe-style  incandescent  light  bulbs.  
A photograph of a 1 L sphere is shown in Fig. 2 
which  also  shows  the  central  explosive  burster 
consisting of C4 within a hollow plastic sphere 3 
mm wall thickness.  A tube attached to the burster 
sphere  was  used  to  allow  the  insertion  of  the 
detonator into the C4.  Two different sized burster 
charges were used either 5.1 or 3.8 cm outer dia 
containing either 80 or 28 g of C4 respectively.   
Fig. 2. Photograph of 1 L glass sphere containing 
distilled water.  Central burster contains 28 g C4. 
Comparison of Water and Glycerol in Spheres 
  We begin by considering in some detail some 
experimental  data  for  water  and  glycerol  before 
going  on  to  more  detailed  experimental  and 
numerical  analysis.  The  images  shown  in  Fig.  3 
below were for 80 g C4 explosive surrounded by 
2.8  L  of  liquid  contained  in  a  glass  sphere.  The 
water  was  at  a  density  of  0.998  kgm3  and  the 
glycerol  at  a  density  of  1.126  kgm3.  This  gives 
fill-to-burster  mass  ratios  FB  of  34.5  and  40.9 
respectively.  In  later  sections  we  shall  report  the 
results of varying this ratio and the fill liquid. 
Fig. 3. Single frames taken from high-speed video 
of  explosive  dispersal  of  spherical  charges 
containing  water  a  and  glycerol  b.      In  each 
case the charge volume was 2.8 L  with a central 
burster of about 80 g C4. 
  We  find  that  counting  jets  directly  from  the 
image  can  be  subjective.  Intensity  levels  can 
strongly influence the interpretation.  We prefer to 
scan the image to obtain line plots of intensity and 
count features from these. Since the jet structures 
are much wider than the scan line we have to take 
care  in  choosing  representative  scans.  We  know 
that  an  arbitrary  radial  line  will  miss  some 
structures  so  we  choose  lines  which  show  the 
largest number of radial features to analyze. This 
method  still  has  a  degree  of  subjectivity  but  we 
find  it  to  be  the  most  consistent  method.    A 
comparison  of  the  results  of  using  different 
techniques for counting jets is given in an earlier 
publication4.  Using  this  method  gives  the  typical 
comparison intensity vs. pixel number shown in 
Fig. 4. Comparisons of scans of intensity vs. radius 
from the images of Fig. 3. 
This  analysis  suggests  that  there  are  roughly 
the same number of structures in each scan. There 
are  similar high  frequency  details  in  both  signals 
but the higher intensity no. of bits in the glycerol 
data  makes  them  more  distinct.  One  can  thus 
conclude from this data that the number of jets are 
comparable for these two liquids with between 11 
and 14 radial features 12 2-1 for the water data 
and  between 10 and 13 radial features 11 2-1 
for  the  glycerol  data.  These  numbers  imply 
primary fragment sizes of order 7 mm in diameter.
Comparison with Grady Model 
  We  can now  return  to  the  predictions  of  the 
Grady  model  in  light  of  the  experimental results.  
For  surface  tension  dominated  liquid  breakup 
Eqn  1  gives  a  prediction  of  the  fragment  size. 
For water we typically have   0.07 Jm2 and   
1000 kgm3. For glycerol in these experiments  
  1126  kgm3  but  water and  glycerol have  very 
similar  values  of  surface  tension  or  surface 
energy. In both experiments the liquid expands at 
around 400 msec at a typical radius of 0.1 m. 
gives a strain rate of around 4000 sec-1.  For these 
values the model suggests that s  0.6 mm. 
This size of droplet is typical of the size seen 
in  the  spray  dome  associated  with  underwater 
explosions  and  in  other  explosively  driven  water 
experiments but it is significantly smaller than the 
dimensions implied by our current analysis of this 
class  of  experiments  where  we  see  much  larger 
primary fragments roughly an order of magnitude 
At  high  strain  rates  viscous  terms  dominate 
the spall strength making the liquid more resistant 
to spall. For water  10-3 Pa.s while for glycerol  
  1.5  Pa.s.  These  values  give  predictions  for  the 
viscous dominated fragment size from Eqn. 2 of 
s  46 m for water and s  1.3 mm for glycerol. 
By  comparing  the  spall  strengths  implied  by 
Grady theory for both viscous and surface tension 
dominated  break-up  we  might  expect  for  pure 
water surface tension dominated breakup and for 
pure glycerol viscous dominated breakup.   
These  models  thus  suggest    water  fragments 
of  0.6  mm  and  glycerol  fragments  of  1.3  mm 
which are much smaller than observed. 
If  we step  back and only consider the trends 
implied  by  the  Grady  model  then  comparing  the 
surface tension dominated value for water with the 
viscous dominated value for glycerol suggests that 
the glycerol fragments should be roughly twice the 
size  of  the  water  fragments  and  thus  we  should 
have  approximately  8  times  more  water  jets  than 
glycerol jets or 4 times as many features along a 
radial  scan  for  water.     This  is  at  odds  with  the 
observations  which  showed  a  similar  number  of 
The  Grady  order  of  magnitude  analysis 
suggests  that  if  surface  tension  alone  is  the 
difference in the number of jets in each experiment 
since  water  and  glycerol  and all  mixtures  of  the 
two have almost identical surface tension values. 
This is consistent with the trends but the observed 
there  should  be  very 
numbers  of  jets  are  much  less  than  this  theory 
If  viscosity  alone  dominates  then  since  at 
room  temperature  glycerol  viscosity  is  1500 
times  higher than  water  we  should  expect  1500 
or  about  40  times  larger  particles  or  about  40 
times  fewer  jets.  This  is  not  observed  in  the 
experiments. The evidence is thus that viscosity is 
not a dominant effect. 
The  above  arguments  led  us  to  consider  a 
series  of  experiments  using  different  liquids  in 
different sizes of container and with a range of FB 
Our  experimental  series  considers  different 
sizes  of  container  and  different  charge  sizes.  If 
tension  and  viscosity  are  not  major 
influences on fragmentation then we might expect 
to  have  hydrodynamic  scaling  so  that  we  obtain 
the  same number  of  fragments  for  different  sizes 
of sphere. In Fig. 5 below we compare the results 
from two such experiments. 
Fig.  5.  Intensity  versus  radial  distance  for  two 
water experiments at different scales 0.94 kg and 
2.8 kg but with similar values of FB. 
One can see very similar numbers of features 
in  both  experiments  so  our  numerical  and 
experimental  analysis  will  use  FB  as  our 
independent  variable.  Fig.  6  below  shows  some 
typical scans of images for different liquids. 
  We  use  the  radius-time  plots  of  the  type 
illustrated in Fig. 7 above to identify the thickness 
 of the compressed  layer when the release wave 
reaches the inner surface and the mean shell radius 
r  at  this  time.  If  we  assume  that  the  primary 
breakup  phase  occurs  at  this  time  and  further 
assume  for  simplicity  that  these  fragments  are 
cubes then the number of fragments predicted is 
Since  we  have  chosen  to  use  the  number  of 
features along a radial scan n as our experimental 
measure  it  is  useful  to  record  how  this  measure 
relates  to  the number  of  fragments  predicted.  By 
assuming  a  constant  solid  angle  for  each  feature 
this  work  we  will  consider  how 
observables  vary  with  fill  to  burster  mass  ratio 
In  order  to  illustrate  the  expected  behaviour 
let us consider the limit of thin shells  purely  for 
mathematical  simplicity  since  in  many  of  our 
experiments  this  becomes  a  poor  approximation. 
In this limit the charge outer radius and the typical 
shell radius are approximately the same r. In this 
case the burster mass 
In this case we can see that the number of features 
along  a  radial  line  will  be  expected  to  decrease 
cid1828cid3415 cid3439
Thus we expect the number of features to decrease 
with increasing FB for powders. We observe this 
Fig. 6. Representative scans of spherical shots with 
  We  use  the above  class  of  data  to  determine 
the number of radial features and to estimate error 
bars.  The  results  will  be  plotted  and  compared 
with numerical predictions in some figures below. 
  We have previously noted34 that for powders 
surrounding an explosive charge the number and 
size of primary fragments correlates well with the 
thickness of the compressed layer at the time of a 
release wave reaching the inner surface see figure 
Fig.  7.  Calculated  powder  density  vs.  time  and 
radius for glass beads surrounding C4 explosive to 
illustrate  wave  and  interface  behaviour  in  the 
to  be  the  case  as  illustrated  by  the  examples  for 
glass bead fills below. 
reaches the inner surface all of the liquid behind 
the spall layer has cavitated. The thickness of the 
shell at this time is thus an unlikely dimension for 
the observed dense primary liquid fragments. 
A plausible alternative dimension to consider 
as  typical  of  the  primary  fragment  size  is  the 
maximum  thickness  of  the  accretion  layer.  The 
maximum occurs as a balance between thickening 
through recompression of the cavitated region and 
thinning by spherical divergence. 
Fig.8. Glass bead dispersal at various ratios of FB. 
These  images  suggest  that  the  number  of  jets  is 
decreasing with FB. We use our preferred method 
of counting feature along a radial scan to quantify 
Fig.  9.  Measured  number  of  features  with  error 
bars along a radial line for glass bead dispersion 
at various ratios of FB. 
For  liquids  there  is  a  slightly  more  complex 
wave structure1. As Figure 7 shows liquids exhibit 
a  spall  layer  and  a  low  density  cavitation  region 
forms  between  this  and  the  inward  propagating 
release  wave.    At  the  time  that  the  release  wave 
Fig.  10.  Calculated  liquid  density  vs.  time  and 
radius  for  water  surrounding  C4  explosive  to 
illustrate  wave  and  interface  behaviour  in  the 
If as argued above we are eliminating surface 
tension  and  viscosity 
difference  between  water and glycerol  is  density. 
As an extreme we can consider just changing the 
density in a numerical model. Using the universal 
liquid  Hugoniot11  allows  us  to  model  different 
liquids  easily  and  self-consistently.  We  assume  a 
minimum  pressure  of  zero  to  model  the  lack  of 
support of tension in a liquid. 
  We  systematically  investigate  the  effects  of 
varying  density  and  sound  speed  using 
geometries in the remainder of this paper. 
Since  the  experimental  data  shows  that  the 
same  number  of  features  are  seen  at  different 
scales if the FB ratio remains constant we choose 
to model a range of FB values and material types. 
We  use  the  universal  liquid  Hugoniot  as  our 
equation of state. This requires a reference density 
and a sound speed to be provided. 
Table  1.  Density  and  sound  speed  date  used  in 
equations of state for experimental liquids 
The sound speed for the specific vegetable oil 
used  is  not  recorded  but  past  work  with  liquid 
edible  oils12  indicates  that  the  sound  speed  is 
comparable to that of water. 
As  a  baseline  problem  we  consider  a  charge 
radius of 0.5 mm and vary the outer radius of the 
fill  from  1  mm  to  2.5  mm.  The  table  below 
illustrates the range of values of FB resulting for 
Table 2. Geometries used and resulting FB ratios 
We plot the resulting radius time plots and can 
use this data to identify the maximum thickness  
of the accretion layer and the mean shell radius r 
at this time. If we assume that the primary breakup 
phase occurs at this time and further assume for 
simplicity that these fragments are cubes then the 
number  of  fragments  predicted is  given  by  Eqn. 
4 above and the number of features along a radial 
scan is given by Eqn. 5 above. 
Let  us  compare  the  results  of  the  modelling 
described above with our experimental results for 
the water-filled experiments. 
Fig. 10 shows the number of features along a 
radial  scan  predicted  by  modelling  using  the 
hypothesis that the primary fragment dimension is 
equal  to  the  maximum thickness  of  the  accretion 
layer. As we increase FB this model predicts that 
the number of features along a scan and thus the 
total  number  of  jets  will  decrease.  This  is  the 
same trend as is seen in model and experiment for 
In  this  figure  we  also  plot  the  result  of  our 
analysis of the experimental data and our error bar 
estimates. The numbers are observed are similar to 
those predicted by this hypothesis but the shape of 
the  curve  is  not  matched.  The  experiment  shows 
that  there  are  fewer  as  opposed  to  more  jets  at 
In the following figures we repeat the analysis 
Fig.  10.  Predicted  and  measured  number  of 
features along a radial line for water as a function 
for ethanol glycerol and vegetable oil. 
In all of these cases we see results similar to 
those found for water. The shape of the curve from 
experimental curve. 
in  all  cases  differs 
It  is  useful  at  this  stage  to  plot  all  of  the 
modelling  results  and  experimental  data  in  one 
Here  we  see  from  Fig.  14  that regardless  of 
material we get the same basic behaviour for all 
liquids  both  experimentally  and  numerically  but 
the  underlying  curves  differ  between  experiment 
reasons  for  considering  the  lower  thickness  of 
the accretion layer  as our dimension of relevance 
Fig.  11.  Predicted  and  measured  number  of 
features  along  a  radial  line  for  ethanol  as  a 
Fig.  13.  Predicted  and  measured  number  of 
features  along a radial  line  for  vegetable  oil  as  a 
Fig.  12.  Predicted  and  measured  number  of 
features  along  a  radial  line  for  glycerol  as  a 
For large FB experiment suggests a very flat 
line for liquids at FB greater than 15 so that the 
number  of  jets  is  independent  of  both  liquid and 
FB. The model predictions are similar in number 
at  high  FB  but  show  a  pronounced  decrease  in 
features as FB increases over the whole range. All 
of the liquids show the opposite trend number of 
jets decrease as FB decreases at the lower end. 
  We  also  show  a  representative  result  from 
wider work on powders. Here the glass bead data 
shows  a  shape  decreasing  with  FB.  At high  FB 
we see fewer features for powders than for liquids. 
This common observation was one of our original 
Fig.  14.  Predicted  and  measured  number  of 
features  along  a  radial  line  for  all  materials 
considered in this paper as a function of FB. 
If we consider the liquid data in isolation we 
see that all of the data from a range of liquids with 
differing surface tension viscosities and densities 
seem  to  lie  on  a  common  curve.  This  again 
suggests that these properties are not dominant in 
determining  the  primary  fragment  size.  We  must 
continue to look for alternative hypotheses. 
  We  have  reported  here  an  experimental  and 
study  aimed  at  addressing 
mechanisms  which  determine  the  number  of  jets 
seen in explosive dissemination of liquids.  When 
we  have  no  outer  boundary  e.g.  an  underwater 
explosion at depth we observe an extremely stable 
gas bubble with no jetting.  We clearly no longer 
have  a  stable  expansion  of  the  system  when  we 
introduce an outer boundary  suggesting strongly 
that  wave  interactions  from  the  outer  boundary 
play a key role in the observed break-up process.  
We  thus  seek  to  investigate  in  more  detail  the 
causes of the observed jetting.  
  We  began  by  considering  the  theoretical 
models  for breakup of bulk liquids  due to Grady. 
His  early  work  noted  that  there  was  a  lack  of 
experimental data to test against and this provided 
one  motivation  for  our  work.    The  independent 
variables  in  these  models  were  density  viscosity 
and surface tension as well as strain rate which 
are  very  amenable  to  variation  in  liquids.    Our 
results  show  fragment  sizes  which  do  not  match 
the model predictions.  
  We  have  previously 
dissemination of powders where the independent 
variables for Grady models are harder to prescribe 
experimentally  and  have  found  good  empirical 
correlations with primary fragment size and thus 
number of jets with predicted shell thickness. The 
shell  structure  in liquids is  more  complex  due  to 
the presence of a spall layer so we considered an 
amended  empirical  model  here 
maximum  thickness  of  the  spall  layer  as  our 
measure.  This  measure  predicts  more  jets  in 
liquids  than  in  powders  as  observed  and  gives 
reasonable estimates for the number of jets at high 
15 values of FB. The underlying shape of the 
curve  of  n  vs.  FB  does  not  match  experiments 
which  unlike  the  case  of  powders  shows  fewer 
If  we  plot  all  of  the  data  from  our  chosen 
range  of  liquids  on  one  plot  we  see  a  common 
curve.    This  again  suggests  that  these  properties  
are not dominant in determining primary fragment 
size.  More  studies  are  planned  including  early 
time X-rays and in cylindrical geometry to clarify 
the difference in jet formation between liquid and 
particle  layers  particularly  for  high  explosive A MULTI-PHASE MULTI-MATERIAL MODEL FOR THE SIMULATION OF 
Alban Combe Christelle Collet 
Herakles SAFRAN group Le Bouchet Research Center 
9 rue Lavoisier 91710 Vert le Petit France 
Abstract. Herakles Safran Group has been developing new kinds of high explosives for 
several  decades  in  its  research  center  at  Le  Bouchet.  Nowadays  Multiphase  Blast 
eXplosives are studied and a numerical tool called DECO has been developed in order to 
support our formulation and experimental works. 
DECO focuses on providing a large and accurate amount of data which is very useful in 
MBX  optimization  context.  Thanks  to  a  multi-phase  multi-material  model  and  an 
adaptive  mesh  refinement  strategy  it  correlates  both  detonation  characteristics  and  far 
field effects with formulations constituents and particle-size distribution.  
During  last  years  in  order  to  meet  the 
constraints  due  to  new  war  theatres  great  efforts 
have focused on the development of new kinds of 
weapons able to generate specific effects such as 
on  one  hand  high  blast  and  temperature  effects 
or on the other hand low collateral damages. 
The blast effect is mainly due to the ability of 
detonation products to react with the oxygen of air. 
This  phenomenon  called  afterburning  strongly 
contributes  to  generate  high  pressure  impulse 
especially in confined spaces. This is why metallic 
commonly  used  in  Enhanced  Blast  eXplosives 
aluminium  particles 
On  the  contrary  the  requirements  for  low 
collateral  damages  munitions  are  a  strong  energy 
delivery  in  the  immediate  environment  of  the 
target  and  a  sharp  attenuation  beyond  a  lethal 
distance  to  be  defined  in  accordance  with  target 
environment. To do so the idea is to convert a part 
of  the  detonation  energy  into  kinetic  energy  to 
project  fine  dense  particles  such  as  tungsten 
particles.  These  particles  generate  strong  impulse 
effects in close environment but due to their high 
density they fall down on the ground quickly after 
their  projection  before  lethal  distance.  This  is 
why the best explosive loadings for low collateral 
damages  munitions  are  commonly  called  Dense 
Inert Metal Explosives or DIME. 
In  the  frame  of  recent  studies  Herakles 
SAFRAN  Group  Research  Centre  has  been 
these  new  kinds  of  compositions 
commonly  called  Multiphase  Blast  eXplosives 
MBX which are able to generate either enhanced 
blast effects or low collateral damages when used 
in an adapted system. The numerical model DECO 
has been developed in parallel of these formulation 
and experimental works and aims to support these 
teams as an optimizing tool. 
Two  main  objectives  have  been  defined  for 
the  model  must  predict 
containing inert or reactive particles such as 
  Second  the  optimization  process  of  new 
DECO  in  the  design  phase  in  order  to 
benefit from a large amount of data that can 
be extracted from simulations. 
In the first part of this paper we will focus on 
physical  aspects  involved  in  Multiphase  Blast 
eXplosives  and  their  numerical  resolutions  in 
  A  dense  multiphase  model  with  complex 
equations  of  state  takes  into  account  the 
compressibility of liquid and solid phases to 
accurately  simulate  the  first  steps  of  the 
detonation  the  high  pressure  expansion  of 
  A  multi-material  model  distinguishes 
several  components  in  each  phase.  Then 
some  simplified  kinetic  laws  model  afterburning  processes  due  to  particles  and 
  An  Adaptive  Mesh  Refinement  strategy  is 
added  to  accurately  describe  after-burning 
reaction zones and far field effects. 
The  second  part  of  the  presentation  will 
exhibit  several  test  cases  used  to  validate  the 
model.  Simulations  will  be  compared  to  specific 
confined  vessel  in  order  to  illustrate  the  good 
the  present  model  concerning 
Enhanced Blast eXplosives Aluminium particles 
and  Dense  Inert  Metal  eXplosives  Tungsten 
PHYSICAL  ASPECTS  INVOLVED  IN 
MBX  AND  NUMERICAL  SOLUTIONS 
The  detonation  process  and  the  detonation 
products  expansion 
is  obviously  a  complex 
problem  to  solve  when  we  consider  such  high 
explosives  as  MBX.  Hereafter  some  important 
observations are recalled to present the models we 
have chosen to introduce in DECO. 
In  order  to  simulate  properly  fluids  motion 
Euler  equation  based  systems  are  implemented  in 
DECO because viscous effects are neglected. 
Concerning  metallic  particles  motion  given 
that their initial volume fraction can reach 40 in 
some  formulations  particles  compressibility  is 
characteristics  crossing  solid  media  and  high 
pressure high density gases. 
The numerical approach retained in DECO is 
to  adopt  the  same  hydrodynamic  behaviour  for 
gases liquids and solids and simulate them as fully 
compressible  media  with  a  dense  multiphase 
solver. We chose the fully unbalanced multiphase 
model  developed  at  IUSTI  by  R.  Saurel  and  coworkers  1  based  on  the  seven  equations  model 
of  Baer  and  Nunziato  2.  For  each  phase  3 
equations  ensure  mass  energy  and  momentum 
conservation  whereas  an  additional  equation  of 
volume  fraction  carries  on  some 
information.  Some  of  the  benefits  of  this  model 
limitation  on  dense  phase  volume 
  Complex equations of state can be used. 
  The Discrete Equation Method 34 used 
this  multiphase  model  fully 
respects conservation and thanks to a clever 
Riemann  problem  analogy  it  also  provides 
a  definition  of  interfacial  quantities  
satisfying second law of thermodynamics. 
  Finally  and  one  of  the  most  interesting 
the  velocity  pressure  and 
imbalance  between  phases 
assumed by this model. 
Indeed  phases  pressures 
quickly after a few acoustic waves across particles. 
For example it takes nearly 10-2 s for a pressure 
wave  to  cross  a  10  m  diameter  aluminium 
However  phases  velocities  and  temperatures 
remain  unbalanced  so  exchange  laws  and  source 
terms are used to relax them. For momentum  we 
used the one defined in Kuhl and Khasainov works 
With  n   the  number  of  particles  per  unit 
function  of  particle 
volume  D   their  diameter  and 
Heat  exchanges  are  nowadays  modelled 
considering only convective effects. 
  is  the  thermal  conductivity  of  gas.  The 
DNu   is  calculated  thanks 
particle  Nusselt  number 
to Katsnelson and Timofeyera correlation 7. 
Where  Pr  is the gas Prandtl number. 
MULTI-MATERIAL MODEL 
In order to distinguish several components for 
each  phase  and  in  a  second  step  to  implement 
chemical reactions a six equations model has been 
used  in  DECO.  It  is  obtained  from  the  full  non 
seven  equations  model 
presented in previous part considering the limit of 
stiff velocity relaxation 8. 
Like  the  multiphase  model  this  simpler 
multi-material  model  is  able  to  take  into  account 
pressure  and  temperature  non-equilibrium  flows. 
relaxation  algorithm 
developed for the seven equations model to reach 
instantaneously  whereas 
temperatures  are  kept  unbalanced  according  to 
Euler  approach  where  no  diffusive  exchanges  are 
considered. This method has the main advantage to 
spurious  pressure  oscillations  often 
the  combined  use  of  complex 
equations  of  state  and  mixing  laws.  Here  each 
component described by a specific EOS follows its 
proper  thermodynamic  path  to  reach  the  global 
pressure equilibrium. 
This  multi-material  model  is  fully  coupled  to 
multiphase model as illustrated in the next figure.  
Figure 1 Coupled system of multiphase and multimaterial models used in DECO 
In order to numerically solve this system each 
timestep is decomposed as follow 
  First  a  hyperbolic  step  is  achieved  without 
  Pressures  are  relaxed  towards  equilibrium 
taking  into  account  for  each  material  its 
thermodynamic path. An expanded material 
will  follow  an  isentropic  transformation. 
However in case of a strong shock the new 
thermodynamic state of the material will be 
forced  to  belong  to  the  Hugoniot  curve 
defined  by  the  initial  unshocked  state  8. 
Once the pressure equilibrium is reached a 
correction on material internal energies non 
conservative  equation  is  done  to  ensure 
that the whole total energy is conserved. 
  Source terms are computed. For momentum 
and  energy  exchanges  analytical  solutions 
can be calculated and avoid any oscillations. 
Finally an isentropic relaxation of pressure 
is  applied  taking  into  account  momentum 
and energies modifications. 
The  main  purpose  to  develop  an  EBX  is  to 
benefit  of  an  additional  amount  of  energy  during 
the expansion phase of detonation products. It has 
already  been  demonstrated 
products  react  with  oxidizer  environment.  For 
example  TNT  is  73  stronger  in  an  oxygen  filled 
room than in a nitrogen one. 
In order to increase the release of energy after 
the  detonation  wave  aluminium  particles  are 
introduced  and  mostly  burn  during  the  expansion 
of detonation products. Several reactive metals can 
be  used  such  as  bore  magnesium  or  nickel.  The 
benefit  of  aluminium 
combustion enthalpy 9.  
After  burning  reactions  occur  during  the 
expansion phase in two main regions 
  At the frontier between detonation products 
gases and the environment air or water 
  Around  reactive  particles.  Several  authors 
have  proven  in  order  to  simplify  the 
detonation  products  gases  and  in  specific 
configurations  even  cross  the  aerial  shock 
These  two  types  of  combustion  have  also 
different  flame  velocities.  To  provide  an  order  of 
magnitude  a  stoichiometric  mix  of  detonation 
products and air is ignited at standard pressure and 
high  temperature  1500K  for  our  thermochemical 
computation  it  takes  nearly  10  s  to  fully  react 
Chemkin  2.0  computation10  .  For  a  30  m 
diameter  aluminium  particle 
combustion mode combustion takes almost 10 ms 
Moreover  we  can  generally  notice 
increasing aerial performances of MBX is traduced 
by  a  decrease  of  detonic  performances  compared 
to  ideal  explosive.  In  order  to  quantify  these 
aspects  several  reactive  models  are  introduced  in 
First  during  the  earlier  step  of  detonation 
simple  reactive  kinetics  proposed  by  Fickett  12 
or  Lee  and  Tarver  13  allow  transformation  of 
solid explosive into high density gazes.  
Then the after-burning process is modelled in 
DECO  considering  the  two  aspects  described 
  After-burning  reactions  occurring  between 
detonation  products  gases  and  environment 
gases are assumed to be instantaneous. Even 
if  Arrhenius  type  kinetics  are  implemented 
in DECO not enough works have been done 
yet to present it in this paper. 
  Particle  after-burning  is  modelled  with  a 
Spalding  law  11  diffusive  combustion 
including  Ranz-Marshal  correction  14 
based  on  velocity  differences  between 
particles and gases convective effects. 
Ranz-Marshal correction 
Particles combustion is only activated when 
their  temperatures  reach  an  ignition  point. 
For  aluminium  particles  experimental 
works  of  Guverick  et  al  15  leads  to  the 
following empirical law. 
umT  is the particle ignition temperature 
aluminium oxyde 2300 K 
kC  is oxygen volume fraction 
  is  the  gaz  thermal  conductivity  cal.cm1.s-1.K-1 
d  is the particle diameter 
All these kinetics are computed in an explicit 
operator  assuming  that  energy  and  mass  are 
decoupled.  Once  the  mass  reactions  rates  are 
calculated  for  each  reaction  they  are  summed  to 
provide  the  final  mass  reached  by  each  reactant. 
Some limitations have to be applied to ensure mass 
positivity  at  the  end  of  time  step.  In  case  of  a 
disappearing  material  due  to  several  concurrent 
reactions when the material mass reaches zero all 
reactions  that  contribute  to  its  destruction  will 
have their rates reduced in a manner that  material 
creation and destruction are fully balanced. 
It  must  be  emphasized  that  in  DECO  no 
additional  amount  of  energy  is  created  during 
combustion. All the energy is present at the initial 
step of simulation and is precisely conserved. The 
energy transfer from reactants to products and the 
differences  of  their  thermodynamics  reference 
states  logically  induce  for  exothermic  reaction 
an increase of pressure and temperature. 
EQUATIONS OF STATE EOS  
The detonation wave converts solid explosive 
into  high density and high pressure gases. One of 
the  biggest  challenges  to  match  experimental 
results  with numerical simulations is probably the 
definition  of  equation  of  state  parameters. 
Moreover  it  can  be  shown  that  in  DECO  time  is 
mostly spent by EOS subroutines due to pressure 
computations. We then choose a classic numerical 
efficient Mie Gruneisen form reading 
P   is  the  pressure    the  density  and  e   the 
pressure  and  the  energy  along  of  a  reference 
thermodynamic curve which is mainly an isentrope 
or  an  Hugoniot.  Because  of  the  need  during 
pressure  relaxation  step  of  analytical  pressure 
dependence  on  density  we  actually  use  only  Mie 
Gruneisen  form  based  on  isentropic  reference 
curve.  We  are  then  able  to  rewrite  most  of  well 
known  EOS  like  Stiffened-Gas  Cochran-Chan 
in  agreement  with  Mie 
In  order  to  ensure  the  EOS  validity  in  the 
curve it is important to pay attention on Gruneisen 
.  The  three  forms  of  Gruneisen 
coefficients  proposed  in  DECO  are  listed  in  the 
Table  1   Gruneisen  coefficients 
to  Gruneisen  coefficient. 
Temperature  can  then  be  partially  defined 
definition  of  the  Gruneisen  coefficient  gives  after 
So along isentropic curves it reads 
It  means  in  our  case  where  Mie  Gruneisen 
form  EOS  are  only  based  on  isentrope  that 
temperature  is  already  fully  defined  along  this 
The  additional  definition  of  a  heat  capacity 
extended to other entropy levels because first law 
of thermodynamics gives after some efforts 
temperature  computations 
An  important  point  shown  by  Davis  is  that 
due  to  the  linear  dependence  between  P   and  e
implied by Mie Gruneisen form the heat capacity 
can not be influenced by volume anymore and then 
we  use  in  DECO  two  definitions  a  constant  one 
and a linear one function of entropy. 
Finally  during  the  EOS  parameters  definition 
process a great attention is  focused on the respect 
of Bethe conditions for shock wave stability 19. 
Once detonation products gases are generated 
they  expand  until  a  maximum  position.  The 
these  products  generates  a 
secondary  shock  focusing  and  reflecting  on  the 
centre  and  then  moving  outwards.  When  this 
secondary shock crosses the  discontinuity of fluid 
density  appearing  between  detonation  products 
gases  and  ambient  gases  Richtmyer  Meshkoff 
Instabilities RMI or Rayleigh Taylor instabilities 
can be observed in this region. Moreover the high 
velocity  feature  of  these  phenomena  products 
expansion  or  shock  waves  makes  viscous  effects 
generated  by  RMI  are  not  dissipated  and  can  be 
well observed on fireballs 20. 
In  order  to  track  precisely  instabilities  and 
Refinement  strategy  is  used  in  DECO.  The  AMR 
package called PARAMESH 21 is based on D. 
De Zeeuw and K.G. Powell works. The computed 
domain  is  divided  into  blocks  containing  a  fixed 
number of mesh cells. A block refinement consists 
in subdividing it by a factor 12 into smaller blocks 
ones  are  obviously  based  on  a  variable  level 
pressure velocity  or a variable gradient. Quite 
easy to implement they both have the drawback of 
not  being  dimensionless  which  means  that  the 
user  must  be  very  careful  with  their  applications. 
Two  more  precise  and  interesting  criteria  are 
Sun  and  Takayama  22  criterion  is  based  on 
the ratio of the second-order derivative term to the 
first-order one of a tracked variable. It is written 
    where  u   is  the 
The   dependent term is designed to avoid a 
zero  denominator  and  we  used  the  proposed 
The second criterion used in  DECO  has been 
derivatives  calculated  with  different  numerical 
stencils. The mathematical form is 
in-house  and  compares 
In  a  practical  use  when  a  criterion 
respectively  upper  or  lower  than  a  given  bound 
the mesh is refined or coarsened. Both criteria can 
be compared on the following test curves. 
shock wave arctan model
acoustic wave cos model
Figure  2  Adapted  mesh  example  obtained  with 
DECO for a cylinder charge initially placed at 1.8 
m  heigh.  In  this  case  AMR  criteria  are  tracking 
shock  discontinuities  and  detonation  products 
The  block  mesh  refinement  or  coarsening 
can be controlled with several criteria. The easiest 
Figure  3  Test  for  AMR  criteria.  The  left  case  is 
based  on  a  arctan  curve  and  mimics  a  sharp 
discontinuity. The right case is based on a cosinus 
function and models a noise. 
Both  advanced  criteria  give  good  agreements 
for  sharp  discontinuities.  However  considering 
acoustic waves Sun and Takayama criterion is not 
uniform and increases near extremes second-order 
derivative  maximum  and  zero  first-order  one 
whereas  it  can  be  theoretically  shown  that  our 
criterion  stays  constant  and  its  level  depends  on 
the  ratio  of  spatial  discretisation  to  cosinus  signal 
wavelength.  This  point  illustrates  the  reason  why 
we  decided  to  develop  this  new  criterion  in  order 
to  track  as  more  selectively  as  possible  any  sharp 
CONFINED VESSEL TEST CASES 
height. The cylinders are drilled in the axis so that 
a  plastic  explosive  can  be  introduced  inside  in 
order  to  overdrive  the  reaction  process  in  the 
The Herakles confined vessel is modelled as a 
2D  axisymmetric  domain.  The  mesh  is  initially 
composed  of  1152  x  84  mesh  cells  so  spatial 
discretisation is less than 2 mm in both radial and 
REDUCTIVE ATMOSPHERE 
In  the  case  of  enhanced  blast  effects  the 
challenge  was  to  evaluate  these  compositions  at 
small  scale  whereas  the  blast  effects  are  strongly 
dependent  on  the  geometry  of  the  charge  and  the 
environment. Indeed the presence of obstacles can 
modify the mixing of detonation products with air 
and  then  the  blast  effects  performances.  As  a 
consequence  it  has  been  necessary  to  design  a 
new  experimental  facility  for  evaluating  such 
compositions at small scale. 
The facility chosen for this study is a confined 
vessel 100 litres inner diameter of 280 mm 2 m 
long  instrumented  with  3  pressure  sensors  3 
thermocouples and a photodiode. A picture of  the 
confined vessel is given in Figure 4. 
composition with an initial density of 1.593 g.cm-3. 
The  Equation  of  State  is  determined  thanks  to 
Cheetah  2.0  23  computations  a  JWL  EOS  is 
fitted  on  BKWS  results  and  its  parameters  are 
RDX-Wax detonation products 
4.386 10-2 Mbar   0.23 
RDX-Wax detonation products 
Thermodynamic reference state 
Figure  4  Picture  of  the  confined  vessel  used  for 
scale  evaluations  of  enhanced  blast 
It  can  be  filled  either  with  oxygen  air  or 
nitrogen  in  order  to  increase  or  not  after-burning 
This vessel is able to sustain 30 grams of high 
explosive  detonation  which  roughly  corresponds 
to a bare charge of 30 mm in diameter 20 mm in 
Table  2  JWL  EOS  parameters  of  RDX  Wax 
detonation  products  and  thermodynamic  reference 
Two  simulations  have  been  executed  using 
different nitrogen equations of state. A first perfect 
gas  model  of  nitrogen  has  been  proposed  with  an 
manually  corrected  isentropic  coefficient  of  1.32 
in  order  to  respect  the  fact  that  nitrogen  is 
shocked.  A  second  model  is  based  on  a  JWL 
equation  of  state  and  a  variable  Gruneisen 
coefficient Trotsyuk et al form. 
Nitrogen  is  assumed  totally  inert  in  this 
simulation so no chemical reactions are implied. 
DECO  multi-material  model  simulations  are 
in  good  agreement  with  experiments  in  terms  of 
pressure level and shock arrival times. The use of a 
variable  Gruneisen  coefficient  avoids  manual 
corrections of EOS parameters which is necessary 
for predictive applications. 
RDX-WAX  COMPOSITION  IN  OXIDANT 
Figure 5 Comparison between experiment symbols and simulation solid line for RDX- Wax in nitrogen 
gas.  Black  curve  is  obtained  with  a  perfect  gas  model  of  nitrogen  and  a  manually  corrected  isentropic 
coefficient whereas green curve illustrates results given by a variable Gruneisen coefficient. 
DECO Gruneisen variable
Figure  6  Comparison  between  experiment  symbols  and  simulation  solid  line  for  RDX-  Wax  in  air. 
Black curve is obtained with manually corrected perfect gas models of nitrogen and oxygen whereas green 
curve illustrates results given by variables Gruneisen coefficients 
In  order  to  take  into  account  afterburning 
to  characterize  post-combustion 
performed  with  a  stoichiometric  mixture  of 
detonation products and oxygen.  A JWL equation 
with  is  adequately  used  to  fit  BKWS  results.  The 
thermodynamic state 
RDX-Wax post-combustion products 
Table 3 Thermodynamic reference state of RDXWax post-combustion products 
Only  one  chemical  reaction  is  then  used  in 
Once  again  two  different  manners  defining 
EOS  parameters  for  surrounding  gases  oxygen 
and nitrogen have been tested. We use in one case 
perfect  gas  equation  with  manually  corrected 
isentropic  coefficient  and  in  the  other  case 
variable  Gruneisen  coefficient  are  computed 
directly  in  the  code  thanks  to  a  Trotsyuk  et  al 
discrepancies  in  shock  arrival  times  and  pressure 
verifications  and  comparisons  with  analytical 
solutions shock tubes  we can state that it is not 
linked with a problem due to the solver. Moreover 
some  investigations  on  post  combustion  products 
EOS  have  shown  that  a  decrease  of  the  internal 
provides better results but can not be explained for 
B2514A  ALUMINIUM  BASED  MBX  IN 
During  our  first  studies  on  Enhanced  Blast 
eXplosives  14  new  compositions  have  been 
evaluated at small scale in the confined vessel and 
then  after  successive  selections  based  on  targeted 
effects and evaluations at larger scales one family 
leader called B2514A has been retained. 
Table 4 Details of B2514A constituents 
In order to test DECO prediction capabilities 
the  numerical  study  of  B2514A  started  from  its 
constituent  list.  The  characterization  method  used 
to  describe  detonation  products  gases  and  post 
simulations has been applied. The aluminium part 
of  the  initial  composition  is  supposed  inert  and  is 
removed from these simulations.  
modelled as a different phase  with a stiffened gas 
equation fitted on the shock Hugoniot curves.  
Considering the fact that aluminium can react 
in  detonation  products  we  characterized 
  obtained  at  the  end  of 
this combustion  with the  help of thermo-chemical 
Finally a six reactions scheme is defined 
At  the  beginning  of  the  simulation  the  small 
explosive  cylinder  30  mm  diameter  and  20  mm 
height  is  located  at  the  rear  end  of  the  confined 
vessel and initiated in detonation thanks to a tricky 
reactive kinetic written below  
Thanks to this simple kinetic main detonation 
effects  on  solid  phase  variables  temperature 
velocities are taken into account. 
Figure 7  Detonation initiation of MBX sample in the confined vessel. 
Figure 8 Comparison between experiments symbols and simulation continuous line for B2514 A in air. 
Some discrepancies in shock arrival times are 
observed  and  are  linked  to  the  EOS  of  post 
combustion  products  though  the  simulation  gives 
good agreement for pressure levels and illustrates 
the  capability  of  DECO  model  to  predict  MBX 
performances.  Moreover  this  sort  of  simulation 
illustrates  its  potential  use  in  an  optimization 
context.  Indeed  some  data  not  easily  defined  by 
experiments  can  be  estimated.  For  example  it  is 
the  case  here  for  the  aluminium  burning  rate.  A 
modification of aluminium particle size could then 
increase  drastically  aerial  performances  as  shown 
Reference composition - B2514A
Modified composition - aluminium particle size
Figure 9  Illustration of DECO model capabilities 
to distinguish effects of aluminium particle size on 
aerial performances 
The  development  of  new  kinds  of  explosives 
is  nowadays  motivated  by 
performance  or  by  a  better  control  of  lethal  zone. 
In  this  context  Herakles  has  been  developing  an 
in-house  numerical  tool  called  DECO  in  order  to 
support its formulation and characterization teams.
Nowadays  the  model  is  already  based  with 
success  on  a  coupling  of  a  fully  non  equilibrium 
multiphase model and a multi material model in a 
stiff  pressure  relaxation  limit.  Each  material  is 
governed  by  its  own  complex  equation  of  state 
JWL mHOM Cochran Chan Stiffened Gas and 
Perfect  Gas  and  no  mixing  law  is  used  to  avoid 
spurious  pressure  oscillations.  The  imbalance  of 
velocity  and  temperature  is  maintained  and  tends 
to  relax  thanks  to  exchanges  laws  of  momentum 
and  energy.  Mass  transfer  occurring  during  afterburning  processes  of  gas  and  particles  are 
managed  by  an  explicit  chemical  solver  using  for 
instance  instantaneous  rates  for  gas  reactions  and 
Spalding burning laws for reducing particles. 
Thanks to these  solvers the  Multiphase Blast 
eXplosives  behaviour  can  be  modelled  by  DECO 
from  the  earlier  stage  of  detonation  until  the  full 
expansion of detonation products and particles. 
discretisation  around  sharp  discontinuities  like 
shock  waves  and  gas  frontiers  an  AMR  package 
has  been  added  to  DECO  and  a  specific  criterion 
has  been  developed  to  control  mesh  refinement 
respectively coarsening as selectively as possible. 
Obviously special care should be taken during 
definition  of  Equation  Of  State  parameters  to 
strictly  assure  shockwaves  velocities  but  results 
qualitatively agree with experimental signals. 
The goal of such a tool has been illustrated on 
an  example.  First  it  provides  a  wide  amount  of 
temporal and spatial data like pressure velocities 
temperatures  and  locations  of  gas  and  particles. 
But more interesting for performance criteria is its 
ability to take stock of mass and energy of several 
In order to go further in the comprehension of 
MBX  behaviour  new  works  have  already  been 
  The analysis of radiative effects on thermal 
exchanges  in  order  to  either  neglect  or 
integrate them in DECO. 
  Finally  some investigations  should be done 
to  be  more  representative  of  wide  particles 
size distributions encountered in MBX. Investigation of the effects of microstructure and binder properties on
impact-induced fragmentation in explosives with meso-scale simulations
Bradley W. White H. Keo Springer and Chadd M. May
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 7000 East Avenue Livermore CA 94550 U.S.A.
Abstract. A critical mechanism in delayed XDT X for unknown Detonation Transition
modes is the fragmentation of energetic materials under high-speed impact loading. Fragment size and spacing distribution in turn inuence the recompaction initiation and subsequent detonation propagation during XDT. We perform meso-scale simulations to examine
the effects of microstructure and binder properties on impact-induced fragmentation behavior. Such studies provide a numerical framework for understanding structure-property
relationships and designing new energetic materials with optimized safety properties. We
employ a multi-physics arbitrary-lagrangian-eulerian code ALE3D 1  for these simulations. Unreacted equation-of-state properties as well as strength properties were taken
from previous meso-scale studies on HMX. In these simulations the binder strength is varied to reect the strength of commonly used energetic material binders e.g. HTPB Kel-F
PTFE Epoxy and Estane. HMX grain size distribution and volume fraction and binder
thickness are also varied to explore microstructural effects.
Propellants and explosives that have experienced
high velocity insults such as from bullet or fragment impacts can undergo reactions that exhibit a
delayed transition to detonation 2. The associated
impact stresses are lower and the time to detonation
as much as 100 microseconds is much longer
than durations observed in the shock-to-detonations
SDT which occur approximately within the rst
passing shock front few microseconds.
type of detonation transition is referred to as an
unknown-to-detonation transition XDT since the
mechanisms that lead up to detonation are not entirely known. The common thought however is that
XDT reactions modes are a result of increased sensitivity following a propagating pressure front due
to damage nucleation in the form of porosity and
In burn-to-violent reaction BVR experiments 3 and XDT experiments 4 5 the recompaction
of damaged propellants is considered an initiation
mode that leads to detonation as are friction initiation mechanisms 5 where explosive grains interact
as multiple shock wave pass through damaged material. The binder is believed to have a strong effect
on this mode of detonation as decohesion of the explosive grains from the binder allow the grains to
interact directly under loads and provide an avenue
for ame propagation. Thus the fracturing behavior of propellants and high explosives are important
to understanding XDT modes and the steps leading up to recompaction such as inside rocket motor boreholes requires an examination of the projectile impact response of energetic materials at the
ing violence in this material based on our understanding suggests that the increased binder content
reduces either the generation of damage by reducing the amount of interfaces that act as decohesion
sites or by increasing the materials inherent capability of transferring load throughout the microstructure and dissipating the intensity of the stress that
causes damage. In mesoscale studies conducted on
HMXEstane binder formulations 10 the materials
with a greater amount of binder was capable of dissipating work done by a shock front more easily.
They also found the binder temperatures to be signicantly lower for impacts at 500 ms than at 1000
ms. Since polymers are temperature and strain rate
dependent projectile impact velocity may play an
important role. Therefore in this study the volume
fraction of binder will be varied within the range
of 75-95 vol. to evaluate if similar effects modify
the fracturing and damage behavior due to projectile impacts at velocities of 500 and 1000 ms. To
account for rate effects and strain localizations that
occur within heterogenous microstructures a rate
dependent strength model is implemented.
Computational Approach
Two-dimensional plane strain mesoscale simulations of PBXs HMX grains embedded in a polymer binder were performed using ALE3D. The geometry of the simulation domain is shown in Figure 1 and consisted of a spherical aluminum projectile 132 diameter impacting the cylindrical
PBX pellets 3.175 mm diameter at a normal incident angle and at velocities of 500 or 1000 ms.
A symmetry boundary was used along the pelletprojectiles axis of symmetry and outowinow
boundaries along the left right and top sides of the
domain. Depending on the thickness of the pellet
1.0 1.5 or 2.0 mm the distance between the exitside of the pellet and righthand side of the domain
was varied so that the total domain width was 6mm.
This was a balance between allowing the fragment
cloud to develop and minimizing the overall computational costs. The zone size used in the calculations
was 1-1.5 m for a total of 8.8 - 19.8 million zones.
This setup was chosen to not only be analogous to
simplied ABVR tests one-sided but mimic new
Fig. 1. Two-dimensional mesoscale simulation geometry
In polymer binder systems the surface area of
grains binder strength and adhesion of the binder
to the grains will affect their response under impact
loading conditions thereby inuencing the fracturing behavior.
In studies carried out on PBXs it
was recognized that cracks formed preferentially at
the interfaces of the binder with larger grains 6 7 8.
In our studies we choose to examine the effects of
internal interfacial surface area by controlling the
grain size and the transfer of stress and fragment
generation by varying the strength of the polymer
binder. More specically we vary the grain size distribution of LX-10 HMX near the main peak to be
1.0 0.50 or 0.25 times the original size. For the
polymer binder strength the binders are varied to
have a range of properties such as the high ductility and low strength characteristics of HTPB to the
more brittle and high strength behavior of epoxy.
While the polymer strength and grain size are important the volume fraction of the binder is also of
interest. LX-04 for example was found to have
a lower degree of violence in Steven impact tests
with increasing impact velocity 9 than other HMXbased explosives which is thought to be due to the
higher binder content 15 wt.. In these experiments the authors noted that there was no evidence
for a prompt detonation for these tests that typically
have load durations of a few hundred microseconds.
The reduced sensitivity to detonation with increas
Diameter 132 1  2 mm 3.175 mm Symmetry Plane X mm 1 mm X  varied to make overall width 6 mm OuClow Boundary OuClow Boundary OuClow Boundary 0.125 mm Table 1. Histogram bin volume fractions and grain
diameters used to capture the targeted section of
the overall grain size distribution for each fractional
size 25 50 or 100 of the original distribution.
Fig. 2. Grain size distributions used for generating
microstructures. Highlighted sections same color
as the line they correspond to denote the grain sizes
of interest for each distribution.
small-scale experimental capabilities currently being developed at LLNL.
Microstructure Generation
The grain size distribution for LX-10 was used
as a reference point for producing simulated microstructures with varying grain size distributions
see blue line in Figure 2. The main LX-10 distribution peak is centered around 150 m with
a smaller peak centered at 7.5 m. The majority of the LX-10 volume is comprised of this larger
peak as such we generated microstructures that had
a baseline grain size distributions within the range
of 48-240 m using four bins highlighted blue rectangle in Figure 2. The original distribution was
truncated to this range to allow for the grain size to
be varied to smaller sizes more readily without having to dramatically increase the mesh resolution of
simulations and to eliminate large grain sizes that
would potentially take up the majority of the simulated microstructure volume. We then varied the
truncated grain size distribution to be .25x and .50x
the original size. These shifted grain size distributions as well as the 4-bin histogram data to generate the microstructures are shownlisted in Figure 2
and Table 1 respectively.
The 4-bin grain size distributions were then used
in ParticlePack 11 to generate synthetic microstructures with varying solids grain loading that ranged
from 45-95. To generate the grains within a
binder matrix ParticlePack rst constructs the randomly distributed grains and then recedes the interfacial boundaries back towards the adjacent grains
using a distance specied by the user. By controlling the recession distance and each bins grain
size specic microstructure compositions can be
targeted. Although grain volume fractions ranged
from 55-95 vol. data will be shown for only a subset of those generated in this report. Figure 3 shows
three representative microstructures that are 1.0 x
3.175 mm2 in size  each with a different grain size
Material Model Parameters
The binders constitutive behavior was modeled
using a Steinberg-Guinan 12 type hardening model
where the ow stress is modied by the plastic
strain p and strain-rate  p according to the following equation
cid1  Y0 1   p  0ncid2a  b p
where Y0 is the initial yield strength n and m the
work hardening and rate senstivity exponents respectively  the work hardening parameter a an
additive rate constant b a strain rate normalization constant and 0 a plastic strain offset. For
the strain softening polymers Kel-F and epoxy Y0
and the rst bracketed section of Equation 1 is replaced with tabulated stress-strain data at a reference strain-rate. For Kel-F and Epoxy this refer
1088
0123456780.010.11101001000!Volume!!Particle!Size!m!25Orig.SizeDist.50Orig.SizeDist.Orig.SizeDist.Table 2. Strength and failure model parameter values for polymer binders
energy E of the material through the relation
cid0b0  b1  b22cid1 E 2
where a0 is a pressure constant a1 a2 and a3 are
bulk moduli coefcients b0 the Grneisen coefcient and b1 and b2 corrections to the Grneisen
coefcient. In our studies a0 b1 and b2 were all
set to zero. Values for the remainder of the EOS
model parameters are given in Table 3 for the polymer binders.
Table 3. Seven-Term Polynomial EOS model parameters for polymer binders. The parameters a0
b1 and b2 were all set to zero.
Results and Discussions
Grain Size Effects on HE Fragmentation
Figures 5 and 6 show the development of plastic strain within the binder material for different
grain size distributions as well as a comparison
of the plastic strain histograms for microstructures
composed of 85 grain volume fraction and KelF binder. Microstructures containing the larger
grain size distributions resulted in a more heterogenous pressure front and produced more localized
stressstrain bridging which propagated throughout the microstructure more quickly than in miIn regions
crostructures with smaller grain sizes.
Fig. 3. Representative microstructures 1.0 x 3.175
mm2 used in calculations. From left to right the
volume fraction of grains are 75 85 and 85
with grain size distributions of 25 50 and
100 the original distribution respectively. While
they appear somewhat circular in the gure the
grains are blocky in nature at higher magnication.
ence strain-rate is 100 s1 and 1300 s1 respectively. The strength parameters for different polymer binders are given in Table 2. A stress f  and
strain f  criteria for failure is implemented and
the parameters are also included in Table 2. A stress
strain curves for Kel-F and PTFE are shown in Figure 4 to give an idea of the relative t of model parameters to experimental data each formulation of
A seven-term polynomial was used to model the
binders equation-of-state EOS in which the pressure is related to the compression  and internal
mation and dissipating the load transferred to the
HMX grains. The effect on the HMX grains was
signicant with much larger plastic strain accumulating in HMX grains for microstructures with less
binder see Figure 7. Additionally strain bridging
was found to be more pronounced in microstructures with a larger percentage of binder and still predominately followed paths connecting larger grains.
This behavior is shown in Figure 8. We also observed the plastic strain distribution for the binder
to broaden with decreasing binder content see Figure 9.
Effects of Binder Strength
The binders strength characteristics plays a key
role in the deformation of polymer bonded explosive composites under high velocity impacts. For
microstructures containing softer binders in relation
to Kel-F such as HTPB had much lower strains
in both the binder see histogram in Figure 10
and HMX grains. The opposite is true of microstructures with stronger materials such as epoxy.
When the Kel-F binder was replaced with epoxy
the strains within the HMX grains increased and the
binder plastic strain histograms broadened signicantly. The propagation of failure of the binder occurred more rapidly in these instances which results
in the generation of more fragments.
Not surprisingly a decrease in velocity from
1000 ms to 500 ms resulted in smaller strains
and more narrow histogram distribution for a given
time. However the difference was in general fairly
small and may be indicative of a greater dependence
on binder strength and microstructure than impact
velocity once the stress magnitudes reach a certain
level. At impact velocities of 500 ms the aluminum
projectile had very limited deformation where as
impacts at 1000 ms the projectile had undergone
more signicant deformation.
have found 500 ms to be sufcient for the aluminum projectile to penetrate through LX-10 samples of similar size with little or no noticeable deformation. No experiments have been conducted at
lowerhigher impact velocities however and therefore a threshold velocity for penetration in theses
Fig. 4. Fit of the strain rate dependent model to experimental data for Kel-F13 14 blue and PTFE15
red at various strain rates using values in Table 2.
away from the impact site the stressstrain bridging appeared to be communicated along paths that
connected the largest grains which also provided
some stress shielding for the smaller grains within
the microstructure. For microstructures with larger
grain sizes we also found the zones within the
binder directly adjacent to the grains strained more
quickly than the interior region of the binder between grains. These effects are consistent with observations of cracks preferentially forming at the
bindergrain interface of larger grains within the microstructure 6 7 8.
Apart from the region directly within the crosssectional path of the projectile the corners junctions of multiple grains had the greatest strain values. From the histograms we found that at times
less than 1 s the extent of binder strain is fairly
similar across the various grain sizes. However at
later times greater than 1 s the straining increases
with increasing grain size and is accompanied with
not only higher max strains but broader strain distributions.
Effects of Binder Volume Fraction
With increasing amounts of binder the HMX
grains take up less of the load as the pressure waves
move throughout the microstructure. This translates into the binder undergoing larger shear defor
0 0.0002 0.0004 0.0006 0.0008 0.001 0.0012 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 Stress Mbar Strain -- Kel-F 3200 s expt. Kel-F 3200 s mod. Kel-F 100 s expt. Kel-F 100 s mod. Kel-F 33 s expt. Kel-F 33 s mod. PTFE 43200 s expt. PTFE 43200 s mod. PTFE 12000 s expt. PTFE 12000 s mod. PTFE 1 s mod. PTFE 1 s expt. Fig. 5. Plastic strain within the Kel-F binder after 2 s following an impact of an aluminum sphere at 1000
ms. The grain volume fraction is 85 and grain size distributions are 100 50 and 25 from left to
right the original distribution grain size.
types of formulations has yet to be resolved.
Conclusions and Future Studies
Based on these simulations the following generalized trends were observed. Firstly increasing
amounts of binder decreased the accumulation of
strain in the HMX and translated into more work
being done on the binder. In delayed XDT reactions
that involve these types of formulations onset of ignition may be a limited to conduction of heat from
the binder to the HMX grains.
Second larger grain size distributions result in
more deformation of both the HMX and binder
with more straining occurring along percolation
paths containing larger grains. This results in more
damagefragmentation across the entire sample at
earlier times thereby increasing chances for ignition due to friction from interactions between grains
or secondary impacts of fragments against surfaces
downstream from the sample such as against rigid
surfaces or in BVR tests with two slabs of propellant which are analogous to rocket motor bores.
Thirdly microstructures with HTPB had less
plastic straining of both the binder and HMX grains
where as those with epoxy had increased straining in both the HMX and binder. This results
in the generation of fewer larger fragments or
more smaller fragments for formulations with
weakerstronger binders respectively.
tests with smaller gap distances there is often less
of a chance for XDT reactions to take place since
the fragment cloud doesnt have a chance to rarify be recompacting. For formulations of propellants or high explosives that may contain stronger
binders smaller gap distances may be needed to reduce chances of XDT reaction upon recompaction.
In our simulations inference of fragment production came from the deformation of the individual
constituents at fairly early times. Future simulations
will address the incorporation of more advanced
failure models that are more representative of physical observations. They will also include an anvil
with varying strength on the downstream side of
the fragment cloud to investigate the contributions
of secondary impacts and recompaction between
the projectile and anvil to XDT modes or reaction such as those observed for propellants inside
rocket bores. Temperature distributions within the
fragments upon striking these anvils will be monitored. Other topics of interest are the effects of
porosity on the fragmentation of PBXs under these
high velocity impacts and the projectiles geometry
and size. Since fracturing of materials has threedimensional attributes such as the stress bridging of
grains simulations will also be conducted on threedimensional microstructures generated in the same
manner. Obtaining a threshold velocity for penetration is also of interest and is important for compari
1091
Fig. 6. Plastic strain histograms for Kel-F after 1 to 4 s following an impact of an aluminum sphere at 1000
ms. The grain volume fraction is 85 and grain size distributions of 100 red 50 yellow and 25
blue the original LX-10 HMX grain size distribution.
son of models to experimental data.
This work was performed under the auspices of
the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DEAC52-07NA27344. This work was supported by
the Joint DoD-DOE Munitions Technology Development Program. LLNL Technical Report LLNLPROC-656539.0RGHOOLQJ PXOWLSKDVH GHWRQDWLRQ ZLWK VWUHDPOLQH PRGHOV
 0 URIW 6 . KDQ   - .LUE DQG 1 1LNLIRUDNLV
DERUDWRU IRU 6FLHQWLILF RPSXWLQJ 8QLYHUVLW RI DPEULGJH 8.
2ULFD DQDGD 3ULYDWH FRQVXOWDQW
EVWUDFW 7KH UHODWLRQVKLS EHWZHHQ VWHDGVWDWH GHWRQDWLRQ YHORFLW WKH UDWHVWLFN GLDPHWHU DQG WKH
SURSHUWLHV RI WKH FRQILQLQJ PDWHULDO DUH RI JUHDW LQWHUHVW WR LQGXVWULDO PLQLQJ DSSOLFDWLRQV RI GHWRQDWLRQ
PRGHOOLQJ 6SHFLDO FDUH LV QHHGHG ZKHQ LPSOHPHQWLQJ WKHVH PRGHOV DV PLQLQJ HSORVLYHV DUH WSLFDOO
QRQLGHDO KHWHURJHQHRXV PDWHULDOV ZLWK ODUJH VKRFN IURQW FXUYDWXUHV
7KLV ZRUN HWHQGV WKH XQFRQILQHG QRQLGHDO RUGLQDU GLIIHUHQWLDO HTXDWLRQ 2 PRGHO RULJLQDOO
SURSRVHG E KDQ  .LUE  7KH PRGHO LV HWHQGHG ZLWK WKH LQWURGXFWLRQ RI D VLQJOHSUHVVXUH
VLQJOHYHORFLW PXOWLSKDVH PRGHO WR HOLPLQDWH WKH XVH RI KHXULVWLF WKHUPDO FORVXUH FRQGLWLRQV 7KH
KHWHURJHQHLWLHV RI WKH QRQLGHDO HSORVLYH PDWHULDO DUH PRGHOOHG PRUH DFFXUDWHO ZLWK WKH LQWURGXFWLRQ
RI D YRLG SKDVH LQ WKH FRQGHQVHG HSORVLYH DQG WKH XVH RI DUELWUDU ep v HTXDWLRQV RI VWDWH IRU HDFK
SKDVH XUWKHUPRUH WKH HPSLULFDO HSUHVVLRQ IRU UDGLDO GLYHUJHQFH IURP WKH SUHYLRXV 2 PRGHO
LV UHSODFHG 8QFRQILQHG UDWHVWLFN UHVXOWV IRU D QRQLGHDO HPXOVLRQ HSORVLYH DUH FRPSDUHG WR GLUHFW
QXPHULFDO VLPXODWLRQ 16 UHVXOWV DQG WKH HIIHFWV RI WKH DSSURLPDWLRQV PDGH WR UHGXFH WKH VVWHP
DUH TXDQWLILHG DVHG RQ WKLV DQDOVLV IXUWKHU LPSURYHPHQWV IRU WKH 2 PRGHO DUH VXJJHVWHG
7KH UHODWLRQVKLS EHWZHHQ VWHDGVWDWH GHWRQDWLRQ
YHORFLW WKH UDWHVWLFN GLDPHWHU DQG WKH SURSHUWLHV RI
WKH FRQILQLQJ PDWHULDO DUH RI JUHDW LPSRUWDQFH WR LQ
GXVWULDO PLQLQJ DSSOLFDWLRQV RI GHWRQDWLRQ PRGHOOLQJ
6WHDGVWDWH 2 GHWRQDWLRQ PRGHOV DUH SRZHUIXO
DQG IDVW WRROV IRU SDUDPHWULF VWXGLHV DQG SDUDPHWHU ILW
WLQJ SDUWLFXODUO IRU GHWRQDWLRQ SHUIRUPDQFH SUHGLF
WLRQV IRU LQGXVWULDO DSSOLFDWLRQV LQ WKLV FRQWHW 7UD
GLWLRQDO 2 PRGHOV VXFK DV WKH RRG.LUNZRRG
TXDVLRQHGLPHQVLRQDO PRGHO  SURYLGH RQO ILUVW
RUGHU DSSURLPDWLRQV RI WKLV QRQLGHDO UHODWLRQVKLS
EHWZHHQ GLDPHWHU VKRFN IURQW FXUYDWXUH DQG GHWRQD
DUO VWXGLHV RI WKH GLDPHWHU HIIHFW UHODWLRQVKLS LQ
FOXGH -RQHV  ULQJ  RRG  .LUN
ZRRG  D  6LFKHO  DQG 7VXJH
 DWHU WKHRULHV GHYHORSHG DQG JHQHUDOLVHG
WKHVH LQLWLDO LGHDV WR LQFOXGH WKH RIIDLV IORZ FRQWUL
EXWLRQ LQ WKH FDOFXODWLRQ RI WKH GLDPHWHU HIIHFW  
0RGHUQ WKHRULHV KDYH EXLOW RQ WKLV HDUOLHU ZRUN WR
VXFFHVVIXOO PRGHO LGHDO DQG ZHDNO QRQLGHDO GHW
RQDWLRQ XVLQJ UHGXFHG 2 PRGHOV VHH  DPRQJ
WKH PDQ RWKHU ZRUNV RQ GHWRQDWLRQ VKRFN GQDPLFV
6 RZHYHU DWWHPSWV WR PRGHO QRQLGHDO HSOR
VLYHV ZLWK WKHVH ZLGHO XVHG PRGHOV    DUH YHU
VSHFLILF DQG FDQQRW EH XVHG LQ JHQHUDO IRU QRQLGHDO
HSORVLYHV ZLWKRXW HWHQVLYH ILWWLQJ RI HDFK HSORVLYH
7ZR PRGHUQ 2EDVHG WKHRULHV KDYH EHHQ GHYHO
RSHG ZLWK D IRFXV IRU QRQLGHDO HSORVLYHV E KDQ
 .LUE  WR EH UHIHUUHG WR DV WKH . PRGHO DQG
DWW HW DO  RWK PRGHO WKH GHWRQDWLRQ ZDYH IURP
WKH VKRFN IURQW WR WKH VRQLF ORFXV DQG VSOLW WKH WZR
GLPHQVLRQDO GRPDLQ LQWR GLVFUHWH VWUHDPOLQHV 7KH
VVWHP RI 2V LV VROYHG DORQJ WKH VWUHDPOLQHV DQG D
VKRRWLQJ PHWKRG LV XVHG WR GHWHUPLQH WKH VKRFN IURQW
SURILOH DQG KHQFH WKH GLDPHWHU HIIHFW
Q RUGHU WR UHGXFH WKH FRPSXWDWLRQDO FRVW DQG DO
ORZ WKHVH PRGHOV WR UXQ TXLFNO RQ DQ DYHUDJH GHVN
WRS FRPSXWHU D QXPEHU RI DSSURLPDWLRQV DUH PDGH
7KHVH LQFOXGH DVVXPSWLRQV ZLWK UHVSHFW WR WKHUPDO
FORVXUH FRQGLWLRQV ORZHU RUGHU DSSURLPDWLRQV LQ WKH
JRYHUQLQJ VVWHP RI HTXDWLRQV DQG DVVXPSWLRQV DERXW
V EHKDYLRXU IRU HDPSOH D KHWHURJH
QHRXV HSORVLYH PD EH PRGHOOHG DV D VLQJOH IOXLG
ZLWK DQ LGHDO JDV HTXDWLRQ RI VWDWH DQG D VLPSOH UH
7KH PRVW UHFHQW DSSURDFK E DWW HW DO  UH
GXFHV WKH DLVPPHWULF XOHU HTXDWLRQV WR D VHW RI
2V XQGHU WKH DVVXPSWLRQ WKDW WKH GLVFUHWH VHW RI
VWUHDPOLQHV DUH VWUDLJKW OLQHV DQG WKDW WKH HTXDWLRQV
RI WKHVH OLQHV DUH NQRZQ 7KH HTXDWLRQV RI WKH OLQHV
DUH GHWHUPLQHG YLD D VKRRWLQJ PHWKRG WKDW XVHV LQIRU
PDWLRQ DERXW WKH VORSH RI WKH VWUHDPOLQHV DW WKH LQ
WHUVHFWLRQ RI WKH VKRFN IURQW DQG VRQLF ORFXV DW WKH
UDWHVWLFN HGJH 8VLQJ WKH DWW PRGHO UHVXOWV DUH QRW
REWDLQHG DV TXLFNO DV ZLWK WKH . PRGHO EXW WKH
JRYHUQLQJ KGURGQDPLF HTXDWLRQV KDYH QRW EHHQ UH
GXFHG EHRQG WKH VWHDGVWDWH DVVXPSWLRQ RZHYHU
WKH PRGHO RQO LQFOXGHV D VLQJOH IOXLG ZLWK D YHU VLP
SOH UHDFWLRQ UDWH DQG DQ LGHDO JDV HTXDWLRQ RI VWDWH I
WKH WKHRU FDQ EH HWHQGHG WR PRUH DFFXUDWHO PRGHO
WKH KHWHURJHQHLW RI QRQLGHDO HSORVLYHV LW ZLOO QHHG
WR LQFOXGH PXOWLSOH SKDVHV ZLWK VXLWDEOH HTXDWLRQV RI
7KH . PRGHO UHGXFHV WKH JRYHUQLQJ DLVPPHW
ULF VWHDGVWDWH DXJPHQWHG XOHU HTXDWLRQV WR D VHW
RI 2V WKURXJK D VHULHV RI DSSURLPDWLRQV ZLWK UH
VSHFW WR WKH UDWLR RI UDGLDO YHORFLW WR DLDO YHORFLW
Q HPSLULFDOO GHULYHG HSUHVVLRQ IRU WKH FXUYDWXUH
RI WKH LVREDUV LV DOVR XVHG WR XSGDWH WKH UDGLDO GLYHU
JHQFH 7KLV LV DQ HWHQVLRQ RI WKH WUDGLWLRQDO TXDVL
RQHGLPHQVLRQDO RRG.LUNZRRG DSSURDFK
WKHUPRUH WKH DXJPHQWHG XOHUEDVHG HTXDWLRQV UHO
RQ D WKHUPDO FORVXUH FRQGLWLRQ 7KH . PRGHO XVHV
WKHUPDO LVRODWLRQ WKDW LV WKDW WKH SUHVVXUH HSDQVLRQ
VWDV RQ WKH LVHQWURSH RI WKH XQUHDFWHG PDWHULDO 7KLV
LV DOVR NQRZQ DV DQ LVHQWURSLF FORVXUH FRQGLWLRQ
7KH UHVXOWLQJ VVWHP RI HTXDWLRQV FRQWDLQV PRUH LQ
IRUPDWLRQ DERXW RIIDLV IORZ WKDQ WKH SDUHQW RRG
.LUNZRRG  DSSURDFK WV DGYDQWDJH LV WKDW LW FDQ
PRGHO PXOWLSKDVH QRQLGHDO GHWRQDWLRQ ZLWK FRP
SOH UHDFWLRQ UDWHV DQG HTXDWLRQV RI VWDWH LQ OHVV WKDQ
D VHFRQG RQ D VLQJOH FRUH RQ DQ DYHUDJH GHVNWRS FRP
7KH ZRUN SUHVHQWHG LQ WKLV SDSHU DLPV WR HWHQG WKH
. PRGHO ZLWK WKH IROORZLQJ
 HOLPLQDWH WKH KHXULVWLF WKHUPDO FORVXUH FRQGL
 LPSURYH WKH UDGLDO GLYHUJHQFH HSUHVVLRQ WKURXJK
HDPLQDWLRQ RI WKH LVREDU FXUYDWXUH HSUHVVLRQ
 LQFOXGH PXOWLSOH SKDVHV LQFOXGLQJ D YRLG SKDVH
LQ WKH XQUHDFWHG HSORVLYH
 LQFOXGH DUELWUDU ep v HTXDWLRQV RI VWDWH
 LQFOXGH DUELWUDU UHDFWLRQ UDWHV
7KH WKHUPDO FORVXUH FRQGLWLRQV DUH HOLPLQDWHG E
DSSOLQJ VLPLODU DSSURLPDWLRQV WR D QHZ PXOWLSKDVH
VVWHP RI HTXDWLRQV 0RUH DGYDQFHG HTXDWLRQV RI
VWDWH DQG UHDFWLRQ UDWHV DUH DOVR LPSOHPHQWHG WKDW DUH
EHWWHU VXLWHG WR QRQLGHDO PLQLQJ HSORVLYHV XUWKHU
PRUH D QHZ HSUHVVLRQ IRU WKH LVREDU FXUYDWXUH WHUP
LQ WKH UDGLDO GLYHUJHQFH 2 LV GHULYHG DQG LPSOH
PHQWHG EDVHG RQ WKH FXUYDWXUH RI DQ HOOLSVH
7KH DPPRQLXP QLWUDWHEDVHG HPXOVLRQ HSORVLYH
0 LV XVHG WR LOOXVWUDWH WKH UHVXOWV RI WKH LPSOH
PHQWDWLRQ 8QFRQILQHG UDWHVWLFN VLPXODWLRQ DUH FRP
SDUHG WR GLUHFW QXPHULFDO VLPXODWLRQ 16 UHVXOWV
DQG WKH HIIHFW RI WKH UHPDLQLQJ DSSURLPDWLRQV LQ WKH
. PRGHO LV TXDQWLILHG DVHG RQ WKLV DQDOVLV IXU
WKHU LPSURYHPHQWV IRU WKH . PRGHO DUH VXJJHVWHG
HQHUJ DUH JLYHQ UHVSHFWLYHO E
0LQLQJ HSORVLYHV FDQ GLVSOD KLJKO QRQLGHDO
EHKDYLRXU W D PLQLPXP D VXLWDEOH SRVWLJQLWLRQ
PRGHO QHHGV WR EH PXOWLGLPHQVLRQDO UHDFWLYH DQG
GHDOO WKH PXOWLSKDVH FRPSRQHQWV RI
WKH PRGHO VKRXOG FDSWXUH WKH KHWHURJHQHLW RI WKH XQ
UHDFWHG HSORVLYH VDWLVIDFWRULO
 VXLWDEOH IRUPXODWLRQ IRU PRGHOOLQJ WKH PXOWL
SKDVH VWUXFWXUH RI QRQLGHDO HSORVLYHV LV D UHGXF
WLRQ RI WKH DHU1XQLDWR 1 PRGHO SURSRVHG LQ
 7KLV VLQJOHSUHVVXUH VLQJOHYHORFLW PXOWLSKDVH
PRGHO HOLPLQDWHV WKH KHXULVWLF WKHUPDO FORVXUH FRQ
GLWLRQV QHHGHG LQ DQ DXJPHQWHG XOHUEDVHG PRGHO
ZLWKRXW WKH RYHUKHDG FRVWV DVVRFLDWHG ZLWK WKH IXOO
V PHFKDQLFDO UHODDWLRQ DV
VXPSWLRQ LV VXLWDEOH IRU WKH IDVW PHFKDQLFDO UHOD
DWLRQ EHWZHHQ WKH HSORVLYH
V FRPSRQHQWV DQG KDV
EHHQ VKRZQ WR DFFXUDWHO SUHGLFW XQFRQILQHG DQG FRQ
ILQHG QRQLGHDO HSORVLYH EHKDYLRXU 
7KH VLQJOHSUHVVXUH VLQJOHYHORFLW PXOWLSKDVH
PRGHO ZLWK PDVV WUDQVIHU DV SUHVHQWHG LQ  LV
ZKHUH WKH VXEVFULSW k UHIHUV WR WKH UHOHYDQW PDWHULDO
k LV WKH YROXPH IUDFWLRQ k LV WKH GHQVLW X  u 
LV WKH YHORFLW YHFWRU DQG E LV WKH WRWDO HQHUJ 1RWH
WKDW WKH WRWDO GHQVLW  LV JLYHQ E  
7KH PDVV IUDFWLRQ VRXQG VSHHG WRWDO DQG LQWHUQDO
7KH YROXPH IUDFWLRQ VRXUFH WHUP
IURP  DQG LV EDVHG RQ WKH DVVXPSWLRQ WKDW D
SUHVVXUH GLVHTXLOLEULXP EHWZHHQ WKH GLIIHUHQW FRP
SRQHQWV ZKLFK LV PHFKDQLFDOO UHODHG E PHDQV RI
HPLVVLRQ RI DFRXVWLF ZDYHV DIIHFWV WKH YROXPH IUDF
7KH PRGHO QHJOHFWV KHDW WUDQVIHU EHWZHHQ WKH SKDVHV
GXH WR WKHLU VPDOO LQWHUIDFLDO DUHD WKDW LV Hk  0 
0DNLQJ WKH DVVXPSWLRQ WKDW WKH UDWLR RI UDGLDO YH
ORFLW WR DLDO YHORFLW LV VPDOO  
LQJ DQ WHUPV KLJKHU WKDQ ILUVW RUGHU LQ UDGLDO YHORF
LW DQG YHORFLW GHULYDWLYHV u 
 0 WKH VLQJOHSUHVVXUH VLQJOH
YHORFLW PXOWLSKDVH PRGHO UHGXFHV WR WKH IROORZLQJ
 r 7KH YDOXH IRU   s LV
DVVXPHG WR EH FRQVWDQW DORQJ HDFK VWUHDPOLQH DQG LV
GHWHUPLQHG DW WKH VKRFN IURQW 7KH PLHG UQHLVHQ
FRHIILFLHQW LV JLYHQ E 1
IRUPV DUH JLYHQ EHORZ
 LV VSHFLILHG IRU HDFK VLPXODWLRQ DQG WKH
7KH UHPDLQLQJ HTXDWLRQV IURP WKH PXOWLSKDVH
7KH VKRFN ERXQGDU FRQGLWLRQV DUH GHWHUPLQHG
ZLWK XVH RI WKH REOLTXH VKRFN UHODWLRQV WR ILQG HSUHV
VLRQV IRU GHQVLW s DQG DLDO SDUWLFOH YHORFLW us
DW WKH VKRFN IURQW 7KHVH REOLTXH VKRFN UHODWLRQV DUH
WKHQ GLIIHUHQWLDWHG WR GHWHUPLQH YDOXHV IRU WKH UHPDLQ
LQJ YDULDEOHV WKH FRQVHUYDWLRQ RI PRPHQWXP LV XVHG
WR GHWHUPLQH WKH VKRFN IURQW LVREDU FXUYDWXUH Cs WKH
UDGLDO SDUWLFOH YHORFLW LV XVHG WR GHWHUPLQH WKH IORZ
GLYHUJHQFH rs DQG WKH UDWLR RI IORZ GLYHUJHQFH DQG
UDGLDO YHORFLW LV XVHG WR GHWHUPLQH WKH FRQVWDQW s
7KH UHPDLQLQJ HTXDWLRQ WR EH GHILQHG IURP WKH .
DSSURDFK LV WKH HSUHVVLRQ IRU WKH LVREDU FXUYDWXUH C
7KLV FXUYDWXUH LV XQNQRZQ EXW LV QHHGHG LQ RUGHU WR
FDOFXODWH WKH UDGLDO GLYHUJHQFH
7KH LVREDU FXUYDWXUH HTXDWLRQ XVHG LQ WKH .
PRGHO LV PRWLYDWHG E FRQVLGHULQJ DQ LVREDU DV D FLU
FXODU DUF SDVVLQJ WKURXJK WKH LQWHUVHFWLRQ RI WKH LVREDU
DQG WKH FKDUJH HGJH 8QGHU WKLV DVVXPSWLRQ WKH LVR
EDU FXUYDWXUH FDQ EH REWDLQHG ZLWK VLPSOH JHRPHWU
W LV D IXQFWLRQ RI WKH UDGLXV RI WKH FKDUJH redge WKH
SRVLWLRQ RI WKH FXUUHQW LVREDU z DQG WKH GLVWDQFH EH
WZHHQ WKH VKRFN IURQW DQG WKH SRVLWLRQ RI WKH FXUUHQW
LVREDU RQ WKH DLV  VHH LJXUH  IRU GHWDLO
7KH UDGLXV RI WKH FKDUJH redge FDQ EH HSUHVVHG DV
ZKHUH Rsedge LV WKH UDGLXV RI FXUYDWXUH RI WKH VKRFN
IURQW DW WKH FKDUJH HGJH DQG  LV WKH DQJOH EHWZHHQ WKH
LQFRPLQJ VKRFN YHORFLW YHFWRU  DQG WKH QRUPDO DW
WKH VKRFN VHH LJXUH 
7KH ODWWHU RI WKHVH HTXDWLRQV WKH PDVV WUDQVIHU WHUP
M  LV EDVHG RQ DQ DVVXPSWLRQ GHULYHG LQ  7KLV
WHUP LPSOLHV WKDW WKH YROXPH IUDFWLRQ 2 LV D IXQF
WLRQ RI DOO GHQVLWLHV LQ WKH SUREOHP 7KLV PHDQV WKDW
WKH PRGHO LV LOOSRVHG IRU k  0 VR LW LV DVVXPHG WKDW
D YHU VPDOO IUDFWLRQ RI HDFK YROXPH LV SUHVHQW QXPHU
LFDOO IRU HDPSOH k   HYHQ LI WKH SKDVH LV
QRW SUHVHQW SKVLFDOO
LYHQ WKDW QHLWKHU redge RU  DUH NQRZQ SULRU WR D
FDOFXODWLRQ WKH . PRGHO VLPSOLILHV WKLV HTXDWLRQ E
XVLQJ WKH HSUHVVLRQ IRU WKH LVREDU FXUYDWXUH DW WKH
LJXUH  5HSUHVHQWDWLRQ RI WKH LVREDUV LQ WKH GHWRQD
WLRQ GULYLQJ RQH  DQG KRZ WKH FXUYDWXUH DW D
SRLQW LQGLFDWHG RQ DQ LVREDU FDQ EH GHWHUPLQHG 7KH
DUURZV DUH SRLQWLQJ LQ WKH SRVLWLYH zGLUHFWLRQ 1RWH
WKDW  DVVXPHV WKDW WKH DUF XVHG WR GHULYH WKH H
SUHVVLRQ LV FLUFXODU VR Rs  R 7KLV ZLOO QRW EH WKH
FDVH IRU PRVW HSORVLYHV PRGHOOHG
RU QXPHULFDO HIILFLHQF WKH . PRGHO WDNHV 
WR EH DQ HPSLULFDOO GHWHUPLQHG FRQVWDQW RZHYHU
RYHU D UDQJH RI GHFUHDVLQJ GHWRQDWLRQ YHORFLWLHV WKH
YDOXH RI  DQG KHQFH  VKRXOG GHFUHDVH DV WKH UDGLXV
RI WKH FKDUJH GHFUHDVHV XUWKHUPRUH WKH FXUYDWXUH
RI DQ LVREDU DW WKH HGJH RI WKH FKDUJH ZLOO EH JUHDWHU
WKDQ WKH FXUYDWXUH RI WKH VDPH LVREDU DW D SRLQW FORVHU
WR WKH DLV GXH WR WKH IDFW WKDW WKH LVREDUV DUH QRW FLU
FXODU 7KLV LV RQO SDUWO WDNHQ LQWR DFFRXQW ZLWK WKH
LQFOXVLRQ RI WKH UDGLXV RI FXUYDWXUH RI WKDW VWUHDPOLQH
7KLV VWXG SUHVHQWV DQ DOWHUQDWLYH WR WKLV HPSLULFDO
LVREDU FXUYDWXUH E DSSURLPDWLQJ HDFK LVREDU DV DQ
HOOLSVH ZLWK D PDMRU DLV RI redge DQG D PLQRU DLV a
VXFK WKDW RQ WKH DLV a  zsledge   7KH FXUYDWXUH
RI WKLV HOOLSVH FHQWUHG DW 0 zsledge LV
7KLV QHZ HSUHVVLRQ UHPRYHV WKH HPSLULFDO FRP
SRQHQWV RI WKH SUHYLRXV HSUHVVLRQ XVHG LQ WKH .
PRGHO 7KH DVVXPSWLRQV PDGH DUH WKDW WKH LVREDUV DUH
HOOLSWLFDO DQG WKDW WKH YDOXHV IRU redge DQG zsledge FDQ
EH HWUDSRODWHG IURP VROXWLRQV RI SUHYLRXV GHWRQDWLRQ
YHORFLWLHV W GRHV QHHG LQLWLDO YDOXHV IRU WKH ILUVW GHWR
QDWLRQ YHORFLW EXW ODUJH YDOXHV WDNHQ IRU D GHWRQDWLRQ
YHORFLW FORVH WR WKH LGHDO GHWRQDWLRQ YHORFLW VXIILFH
7KH XVH RI DQ HOOLSVH WR PRGHO WKH GHWRQDWLRQ GULY
LQJ RQH LV PRUH SKVLFDOO PRWLYDWHG WKDQ D FLUFOH EXW
RQO IRU XQFRQILQHG GHWRQDWLRQV Q VWURQJ FRQILQH
PHQW WKH GHWRQDWLRQ GULYLQJ RQH FDQ IRUP D GUDVWL
FDOO GLIIHUHQW VKDSH 7KH DLP RI WKLV ZRUN LV WR VKRZ
WKDW WKHUH DUH DOWHUQDWLYH PRWLYDWLRQV DQG IRUPV IRU
WKH LVREDU HSUHVVLRQ DYDLODEOH 7KH EHVW FKRLFH IRU
SUHGLFWLYH VROXWLRQV IRU ERWK XQFRQILQHG DQG FRQILQHG
GHWRQDWLRQV ZLOO QHHG WR EH GHWHUPLQHG LQ WKH IXWXUH
ZKHQ D ZLGHU UDQJH RI HSORVLYHV DQG FRQILQHPHQWV
LV WDNHQ LQWR DFFRXQW
7KH . PRGHO LQFOXGHV FXUYHG VWUHDPOLQHV WKH OR
FDWLRQ RI ZKLFK DUH GHWHUPLQHG DV D IXQFWLRQ RI WKH
GHIOHFWLRQ DQJOH  DQG WKH DLDO DQG UDGLDO YHORFLW
7KH GHIOHFWLRQ DQJOH  LV D IXQFWLRQ RI WKH LQFRPLQJ
VKRFN DQJOH  DQG FDQ EH FDOFXODWHG XVLQJ WKH VWDQ
GDUG REOLTXH VKRFN FRQGLWLRQV VHH LJXUH  7KH LQ
FOXVLRQ RI FXUYHG VWUHDPOLQHV DV RSSRVHG WR VWUDLJKW
VWUHDPOLQHV LV DQ DGYDQWDJH RI WKH . PRGHO SDUWLF
XODUO IRU QRQLGHDO GHWRQDWLRQ PRGHOOLQJ
7R IXOO FDSWXUH WKH QRQLGHDO EHKDYLRXU RI LQGXV
WULDO HSORVLYHV WKH KHWHURJHQHLW RI WKH XQUHDFWHG H
SORVLYHV LV PRGHOOHG DV D WZRIOXLG PLWXUH RI D FRQ
GHQVHG OLTXLG HPXOVLRQ DQG D JDVHRXV YRLG SKDVH ZLWK
WKH UHDFWLRQ SURGXFWV PRGHOOHG E DQ DGGLWLRQDO JDV
W LV DVVXPHG WKDW WKH HTXDWLRQ RI VWDWH FKRVHQ WR
PRGHO WKH FRPSRQHQWV RI WKH GHWRQDWLRQ FDQ EH FDVW
LJXUH   UHSUHVHQWDWLRQ RI WKH GHWRQDWLRQ GULYLQJ
RQH  7KH LQFRPLQJ GHWRQDWLRQ YHORFLW YHF
WRU  PDNHV DQ DQJOH  ZLWK WKH QRUPDO WR WKH VKRFN
7KLV YHFWRU LV WKHQ GHIOHFWHG DW HDFK SRLQW DORQJ WKH
VWUHDPOLQH DW HDFK LVREDU DW DQ DQJOH 
ZKHUH k vk LV WKH UQHLVHQ FRHIILFLHQW DQG
LV WKH UHIHUHQFH FXUYH IRU SUHV
7KH LQFOXVLRQ RI DUELWUDU ep v HTXDWLRQV RI VWDWH
LQ PXOWLSOH SKDVHV LQ WKH . PRGHO LV XQLTXH WR
WKLV VWXG DQG LV DQ LPSRUWDQW VWHS WRZDUGV FDSWXULQJ
WKH KHWHURJHQHLW RI QRQLGHDO HSORVLYHV LQ DQ 2
7KUHH GLIIHUHQW HTXDWLRQV RI VWDWH DUH XVHG LQ WKLV
ZRUN 7KH LGHDO JDV HTXDWLRQ RI VWDWH LV XVHG LQ ERWK
VWDWHV RI D WZRIOXLG VLPXODWLRQ DV D WRRO IRU YDOLGD
W LV DOVR XVHG WR PRGHO WKH XQUHDFWLYH YRLG
SKDVH LQ WKH 0 VLPXODWLRQ 7KH 6KRFN0LH
UQHLVHQ 60 HTXDWLRQ RI VWDWH LV XVHG LQ WKH UHDF
WLYH FRQGHQVHG SKDVH RI WKH 0 VLPXODWLRQ DQG
WKH LOOLDPVEXUJ 0 HTXDWLRQ RI VWDWH LV XVHG
LQ WKH UHDFWHG RU JDVHRXV SKDVH 7KH IRUPV IRU WKHVH
HTXDWLRQV RI VWDWH DUH RXWOLQHG LQ 7DEOH  DQG WKH YDO
7DEOH  TXDWLRQV RI VWDWH XVHG LQ WKLV VWXG 1RWH
WKDW IRU WKH 0 HTXDWLRQ RI VWDWH WKH YDULDEOHV
 GHQRWH SROQRPLDOV RI RUGHU
XHV IRU WKH SDUDPHWHUV XVHG DUH JLYHQ LQ 7DEOHV 
7ZR SUHVVXUHGHSHQGHQW UHDFWLRQ UDWHV DUH XVHG LQ
WKLV VWXG RI WKH IRUP
 VLPSOH VLQJOHVWDJH UHDFWLRQ UDWH LV XVHG IRU YDOL
GDWLRQ DQG KDV WKH IRUP
ZKHUH H LV WKH HDYLVLGH IXQFWLRQ
 WZRVWDJH UHDFWLRQ UDWH WKDW LQFRUSRUDWHV WKH FRQ
WULEXWLRQ RI KRWVSRWV FUHDWHG E YRLGV LQ WKH XQUHDFWHG
HSORVLYH LV XVHG WR PRGHO WKH QRQLGHDO HSORVLYH
0 7KH IRUP RI WKH UHDFWLRQ UDWH LV WDNHQ IURP
7KH YDOXHV IRU WKH SDUDPHWHUV RI WKH WZR WSHV RI
HSORVLYHV XVHG LQ WKH VLPXODWLRQV DUH JLYHQ LQ 7DEOH
 7KH HTXDWLRQ RI VWDWH DQG UHDFWLRQ UDWH SDUDPHWHUV
DUH DOO WDNHQ IURP WKH ILWV WR HSHULPHQWDO GDWD XVHG
IRU WKH 16 UHVXOWV LQ 
7DEOH  3DUDPHWHUV IRU WKH LGHDO JDV HTXDWLRQ RI VWDWH
IRU YDOLGDWLRQ FRPSDULVRQV ZLWK 16 UHVXOWV OVR
VKRZQ DUH WKH SDUDPHWHUV IRU DLU XVHG DV WKH QRQ
UHDFWLYH YRLG JDV LQ WKH 0 VLPXODWLRQV
7DEOH  3DUDPHWHUV IRU 60 HTXDWLRQ RI VWDWH IRU
WKH FRQGHQVHG SKDVH RI 0
 VLPSOH WZRIOXLG GHWRQDWLRQ ZLWK HDFK IOXLG PRG
HOOHG DV DQ LGHDO JDV u  3.0 r  1.4 LV VLPX
ODWHG WR FRPSDUH ZLWK VHYHUDO IXOO 16 FDOFXODWLRQV
7KH GHWRQDWLRQ YHORFLWLQYHUVH UDGLXV FXUYH LOOXV
WUDWHV WKH GLVFUHSDQFLHV EHWZHHQ VROYLQJ WKH JRYHUQ
LQJ 3V FRPSDUHG WR WKH UHGXFHG 2 VVWHP RI
HTXDWLRQV 7KH QHZ HOOLSWLFDO HSUHVVLRQ DQG WKH SUH
YLRXV FRQVWDQW  HSUHVVLRQ IRU WKH LVREDU FXUYDWXUH
DUH ERWK LPSOHPHQWHG 7KH UHVXOWV RI WKH FRPSDUL
VRQ EHWZHHQ WKH WZR 2 PRGHOV ZLWK GLIIHUHQW LVR
EDU FXUYDWXUH HSUHVVLRQV DQG WKH 16 FDOFXODWLRQV LV
7KH 2 PRGHO XQGHUSUHGLFWV WKH UDGLXV LQ ERWK
LPSOHPHQWDWLRQV XH WR WKH ILUVW RUGHU DSSURLPD
WLRQV LQ WKH UHGXFWLRQ RI WKH JRYHUQLQJ HTXDWLRQV VRPH
GLVFUHSDQF LV HSHFWHG 7KH QHZ HOOLSWLFDO HSUHV
VLRQ GRHV QRW SURYLGH DQ LPSURYHPHQW WR WKH SUHYL
RXV HPSLULFDO FRQVWDQW  HSUHVVLRQ HFHSW WKDW LW SUR
YLGHV UHVXOWV IRU ORZHU GHWRQDWLRQ YHORFLWLHV RU PRVW
7DEOH  3DUDPHWHUV IRU 0 HTXDWLRQ RI VWDWH IRU
WKH UHDFWHG JDVHRXV SKDVH RI 0
7DEOH  3DUDPHWHUV IRU UHDFWLRQ UDWHV XVHG LQ WKLV
RI WKH GHWRQDWLRQ YHORFLW UDQJH WKH GLIIHUHQFH EH
WZHHQ WKH GLIIHUHQW LVREDU FXUYDWXUH HTXDWLRQV LV YHU
VPDOO HVSHFLDOO FRQVLGHULQJ WKH YHU VPDOO UDGLL LQ
OWKRXJK WKHUH LV VWLOO VRPH GLVFUHSDQF EHWZHHQ
WKH 2 DSSURDFK DQG WKH 16 UHVXOWV WKH FRPSDU
LVRQ LOOXVWUDWHV WKDW WKH QHZO LPSOHPHQWHG HOOLSWLFDO
LVREDU FXUYDWXUH LV SURYLGLQJ D VDWLVIDFWRU ILW ZKHQ
FRPSDUHG WR WKH HPSLULFDOO GHULYHG HTXDWLRQ RP
SDULVRQ ZLWK WKH 16 UHVXOWV DOVR LOOXVWUDWH WKDW LW LV
RQO VKRZLQJ GLVFUHSDQFLHV HSHFWHG IURP WKH ILUVW
RUGHU DSSURLPDWLRQV LQ WKH HTXDWLRQV
7KH DPPRQLXP QLWUDWHEDVHG QRQLGHDO HPXO
VLRQ HSORVLYH 0 LV VLPXODWHG WR FRPSDUH
WKH VLQJOHSUHVVXUH VLQJOHYHORFLW PXOWLSKDVH 2
PRGHO ZLWK LWV SDUHQW 3 PRGHO  IXOO 16 FDOFX
cid29cid30cid31cid1cid23cid14cid11cid12cid19cid1cid32cid27cid1cid15cid12cid32cid1cid17cid24cid14cid33cid16cid28cid1cid12cid34cid35cid28cid12cid24cid24cid17cid14cid15
cid29cid30cid31cid1cid23cid14cid11cid12cid1cid32cid27cid1cid20cid14cid15cid24cid13cid1cid36 cid17cid24cid14cid33cid16cid28cid1cid12cid34cid35cid28cid12cid24cid24cid17cid14cid15
cid37cid38cid19cid13cid17cid35cid39cid16cid24cid12cid1cid30cid40cid41
cid1cid6cid3cid3cid3
cid1cid5cid2cid3cid3
cid1cid5cid3cid3cid3
cid1cid4cid2cid3cid3
cid1cid4cid3cid3cid3
cid1cid4cid3cid3cid3 cid1cid5cid3cid3cid3 cid1cid6cid3cid3cid3 cid1cid7cid3cid3cid3 cid1cid2cid3cid3cid3 cid1cid8cid3cid3cid3 cid1cid9cid3cid3cid3 cid1cid10cid3cid3cid3
cid4cid27cid28cid1cid22cid23cid25cid4cid26
LJXUH  HWRQDWLRQ YHORFLW YHUVXV LQYHUVH UDGLXV
FXUYH IRU WKH WZRIOXLG PLWXUH RI WZR LGHDO PDWH
ULDOV ZLWK u  3.0 DQG r  1.4 7KH GDVKHG
OLQH VKRZV WKH UHGXFHG 2 DSSURDFK ZLWK WKH XQ
GHUOLQJ VLQJOHSUHVVXUH VLQJOHYHORFLW PXOWLSKDVH
PRGHO ZLWK WKH HPSLULFDO LVREDU FXUYDWXUH HSUHVVLRQ
7KH GRWWHG OLQH VKRZV WKH VDPH PRGHO ZLWK WKH HO
OLSWLFDO LVREDU FXUYDWXUH HSUHVVLRQ 7KH VROLG OLQH
LV D TXDGUDWLF ILW WR 16 UHVXOWV LQYHUWHG WULDQJOHV
7KH 16 UHVXOWV ZHUH REWDLQHG ZLWK D ORZ UHVROX
WLRQ 8 FRGH WKH SRLQWV UHSUHVHQWLQJ VPDOOHU UDGLL
ZRXOG UHTXLUH KLJKHU UHVROXWLRQ WR PDNH DFFXUDWH SUH
GLFWLRQV DERXW IDLOXUH GLDPHWHU  FRPSDULVRQ EH
WZHHQ WKH GLIIHUHQW LVREDU FXUYDWXUH HSUHVVLRQV ZDV
WKH IRFXV RI WKLV LQYHVWLJDWLRQ
ODWLRQ LV XVHG WR KLJKOLJKW FKDQJHV WR WKH VROXWLRQ ZLWK
WKH LQWURGXFWLRQ RI WKH ILUVW RUGHU DSSURLPDWLRQV DQG
HPSLULFDO DVVXPSWLRQV DERXW WKH LVREDU FXUYDWXUH
7KH HPXOVLRQ 0 LV GHVFULEHG E D 6KRFN
0LHUQHLVHQ HTXDWLRQ RI VWDWH IRU WKH FRQGHQVHG
SKDVH ZLWK DLU DGGHG DV D YRLG SKDVH LQ WKH XQUHDFWHG
HSORVLYH 7KH UHDFWHG SKDVH LV PRGHOOHG ZLWK WKH
LOOLDPVEXUJ HTXDWLRQ RI VWDWH  WZRVWDJH UHDFWLRQ
UDWH LV XVHG JLYHQ E  WKDW LQFOXGHV D VXEJULG
VFDOH PRGHO IRU KRWVSRW EXUQLQJ 7KH YDOXHV IRU WKH
SDUDPHWHUV IRU WKH UHDFWLRQ UDWH DQG HTXDWLRQV RI VWDWH
DUH JLYHQ LQ 7DEOHV    7KH YDOXHV IRU WKH LQLWLDO
YROXPH IUDFWLRQV DUH
void  1.0  unreacted  gas .
 FRPSDULVRQ EHWZHHQ WKH SUHYLRXV FRQVWDQW  LVR
EDU HSUHVVLRQ DQG WKH QHZ HOOLSWLFDO LVREDU HSUHV
VLRQ LV PDGH LQ LJXUH  ZLWK WKH 16 DQG HSHUL
PHQWDO UHVXOWV JLYHQ IRU UHIHUHQFH 7KH HOOLSWLFDO LVR
EDU HSUHVVLRQ JLYHV D EHWWHU ILW WR WKH 16 UHVXOWV DQG
HSHULPHQWDO SRLQWV IRU KLJKHU GHWRQDWLRQ YHORFLWLHV
7KH FRQVWDQW  HSUHVVLRQ JLYHV D EHWWHU ILW IRU WKH
ORZHU GHWRQDWLRQ YHORFLWLHV RZHYHU LW LV LPSRUWDQW
WR QRWH WKDW WKH HOOLSWLFDO HSUHVVLRQ SURGXFHV D FXUYH
RI VLPLODU VKDSH WR WKDW RI ERWK WKH 16 DQG HSHUL
PHQWDO UHVXOWV 7KLV LV QRW WKH FDVH IRU WKH HPSLULFDO
HSUHVVLRQ 7KLV LV GXH WR WKH IDFW WKDW WKH UHODWLRQ
VKLS EHWZHHQ WKH GHWRQDWLRQ YHORFLW DQG WKH OHQJWK RI
WKH GHWRQDWLRQ GULYLQJ RQH  LV QRQOLQHDU 7KH
FRQVWDQW  LVREDU HSUHVVLRQ GRHV QRW WDNH WKLV FKDQJH
LQWR DFFRXQW ZKHUHDV WKH QHZ IRUPXODWLRQ GRHV
7KH OHIW KDQG VLGH RI LJXUH  VKRZV D FRQWRXU SORW
IRU D VLQJOH GHWRQDWLRQ YHORFLW IURP WKH 2 PRGHO
ZLWK WKH QHZ LVREDU FXUYDWXUH HSUHVVLRQ 7KLV LV
FRPSDUHG WR 16 RXWSXW VKRZQ RQ WKH ULJKW KDQG VLGH
LJXUH  VKRZV FRQWRXU SORWV IRU WKH VDPH GHWRQD
WLRQ YHORFLW EXW WKH OHIW KDQG VLGH LOOXVWUDWHV WKH SUHV
VXUH FRQWRXUV REWDLQHG ZKHQ WKH HPSLULFDO FRQVWDQW 
HSUHVVLRQ IRU WKH LVREDU FXUYDWXUH LV XVHG 7KH HP
SLULFDO LVREDU FXUYDWXUH HSUHVVLRQ SUHGLFWV D ODUJHU
UDGLXV WKDQ WKH QHZ HSUHVVLRQ EXW WKH XQGHUHVWLPD
WLRQ RI WKH  DQG UDGLXV RI FXUYDWXUH LV VLPLODU IRU
7KHVH FRQWRXU SORWV LOOXVWUDWH WKDW WKH 2 PRGHO LV
SURYLGLQJ XVHIXO LQIRUPDWLRQ DERXW WKH SKVLFV RI WKH
SUREOHP EXW WKDW LW SURYLGHV LQDFFXUDWH LQIRUPDWLRQ
DERXW JHRPHWU RI WKH SUREOHP 7KDW LV WKH YDOXHV IRU
WKH SUHVVXUH DUH FRPSDUDEOH WKURXJKRXW WKH  EXW
WKH OHQJWK RI WKH  DQG WKH UDGLXV RI WKH FKDUJH DUH
XQGHUHVWLPDWHG E ERWK LPSOHPHQWDWLRQV RI WKH 2
7KH 16 UHVXOWV KLJKOLJKW WKDW DQ HOOLSWLFDO ILW RI WKH
LVREDU FXUYDWXUH LV RQO UHOHYDQW IRU SDUW RI WKH 
7RZDUGV WKH VRQLF ORFXV DQG WKH FKDUJH HGJH WKH LVR
EDUV VKRZ PRUH FRPSOH EHKDYLRXU DV WKH FXUYDWXUH
FKDQJHV VLJQ 7KLV LV RYHUHVWLPDWHG ZKHQ WKH HOOLSWL
FDO LVREDU FXUYDWXUH HSUHVVLRQ LV XVHG DQG XQGHUHV
WLPDWHG ZKHQ WKH FRQVWDQW  HPSLULFDO HSUHVVLRQ IRU
7KH 2 LPSOHPHQWDWLRQV DOVR VKRZ WKDW WKHUH LV
D SUREOHP ZLWK WKH PRGHO DW WKH FKDUJH HGJH W WKLV
SRLQW WKH VKRFN IURQW DQG VRQLF ORFXV RIWHQ FURVV FDXV
LQJ WKH IODW HGJH RI WKH FKDUJH VKRZQ RQ WKH OHIW KDQG
VLGH RI LJXUHV  DQG  7KLV PD EH UHFWLILHG LQ WKH
IXWXUH ZLWK D PRUH DSSURSULDWH LVREDU FXUYDWXUH H
LJXUH  LOOXVWUDWHV WKH HSHFWHG XQGHUHVWLPDWLRQ
RI WKH UDGLXV EXW ZLWK WKH XVH RI D PRUH JHQHUDO LVR
EDU FXUYDWXUH WHUP LW LV FOHDUHU WKDW WKLV GLVFUHSDQF
LV FDXVHG E WKH DVVXPSWLRQV LQ WKH UHGXFWLRQ RI WKH
HTXDWLRQV DQG QRW LQ WKH HPSLULFDO LVREDU FXUYDWXUH
OO LPSOHPHQWDWLRQV VWLOO JLYH GHWRQDWLRQ YHORFL
WLHV ZLWKLQ  RI WKH 16 VROXWLRQ RU HSHULPHQ
WDO SRLQWV 7KH HPSLULFDO LVREDU FXUYDWXUH HSUHVVLRQ
LPSOHPHQWDWLRQ XQGHUSUHGLFWV WKH IDLOXUH GLDPHWHU IRU
0 DOWKRXJK GRHV ILQG VROXWLRQV XS WR WKH H
SHULPHQWDO SRLQWV 7KH HOOLSWLFDO FXUYDWXUH HSUHVVLRQ
ILQGV VROXWLRQV XS WR DQG EHRQG WKDW RI WKH 16 UH
7KH ZRUN SUHVHQWHG LQ WKLV SDSHU HWHQGV WKH KDQ
.LUE UHGXFHG 2 PRGHO E
 HOLPLQDWLQJ WKH KHXULVWLF WKHUPDO FORVXUH FRQGL
WLRQV ZLWK WKH LQWURGXFWLRQ RI D QHZ XQGHUOLQJ
 HOLPLQDWLQJ WKH FRQVWDQW   0.5 LVREDU FXUYD
WXUH HSUHVVLRQ ZLWK WKH LQWURGXFWLRQ RI DQ H
SUHVVLRQ IRU WKH FXUYDWXUH RI DQ HOOLSVH
LJXUH  HWRQDWLRQ YHORFLW YHUVXV LQYHUVH UDGLXV
FXUYH IRU 0 ZLWK GLIIHUHQW DSSURDFKHV WR HV
WLPDWLQJ WKH LVREDU FXUYDWXUH RPSDULVRQ LV PDGH
WR 16 UHVXOWV LQYHUWHG WULDQJOHV WKH ILWWHG FXUYH
IURP WKHVH 16 SRLQWV WKH VROLG OLQH DQG HSHULPHQ
WDO SRLQWV VTXDUH SRLQWV 7KH GDVKHG OLQH ZLWK VWDUV
VKRZV WKH UHGXFHG 2 DSSURDFK ZLWK WKH HPSLULFDO
HSUHVVLRQ IRU WKH LVREDU FXUYDWXUH DQG WKH GRWWHG OLQH
ZLWK FURVVHV VKRZV WKH UHVXOW ZLWK WKH QHZ HSUHVVLRQ
LJXUH  3UHVVXUH 3D FRQWRXU SORW VKRZLQJ WKH
LVREDUV IRU 0 IRU D  4920ms1 REWDLQHG XV
LQJ WKH 2 PRGHO ZLWK WKH HOOLSWLFDO LVREDU HSUHV
VLRQ OHIW DQG D 16 VLPXODWLRQ ULJKW
LJXUH  3UHVVXUH 3D FRQWRXU SORW VKRZLQJ WKH
LVREDUV IRU 0 IRU D  4920ms1 REWDLQHG XV
LQJ WKH 2 PRGHO ZLWK WKH HPSLULFDO FRQVWDQW  LVR
EDU HSUHVVLRQ OHIW DQG D 16 VLPXODWLRQ ULJKW
 LQFOXGLQJ PXOWLSOH SKDVHV LQFOXGLQJ D YRLG SKDVH
LQ WKH XQUHDFWHG HSORVLYH
 LQFOXGLQJ DUELWUDU ep v HTXDWLRQV RI VWDWH
VXLWHG WR WKH VSHFLILF SKDVHV LQ WKH GHWRQDWLRQ
 LQFOXGLQJ DUELWUDU UHDFWLRQ UDWHV VXLWHG WR WKH
QRQLGHDO HSORVLYHV RI LQWHUHVW
7KHVH HWHQVLRQV LPSURYH WKH DSSOLFDELOLW RI WKH
PRGHO WR QRQLGHDO HSORVLYHV RPSDULVRQV ZLWK
16 DQG HSHULPHQWDO UHVXOWV VKRZ WKDW WKH VDPH
UDGLL KDYH GHWRQDWLRQ YHORFLWLHV ZLWKLQ  RI WKH
VROXWLRQ DQG WKH VKDSH RI WKH GHWRQDWLRQ YHORFLW
LQYHUVH UDGLXV FXUYH LV VLPLODU WR WKDW RI WKH 16 FDO
FXODWLRQV GHVSLWH WKH XQGHUSUHGLFWLRQ RI WKH UDGLXV
RPSDUHG WR RWKHU 2 UHGXFHG PRGHOV WKLV DS
SURDFK KDV PDQ DGYDQWDJHV ZLWK WKH LPSURYHPHQWV
SUHVHQWHG LQ WKLV ZRUN 7KH PRGHO ZDV GHYHORSHG IRU
QRQLGHDO GHWRQDWLRQ VR GRHV QRW PDNH DQ DVVXPS
WLRQ DERXW WKH VLH RI WKH FXUYDWXUH RI WKH VKRFN IURQW
W LV DOVR DEOH WR FDOFXODWH GRHQV RI SRLQWV RQ D GHWR
QDWLRQ YHORFLWLQYHUVH UDGLXV FXUYH ZLWKLQ D IHZ PLQ
XWHV 2SWLPLVDWLRQ RI WKH FRGH RU XVH RI SDUDOOHO RU
38 FRPSXWLQJ FRXOG SURGXFH UHVXOWV IRU GRHQV RI
GHWRQDWLRQ YHORFLWLHV LQ VHFRQGV
7KH JHQHUDOLVDWLRQ RI WKH 2 PRGHO WR LQFOXGH
D QRQHPSLULFDO HSUHVVLRQ IRU LVREDU FXUYDWXUH SUR
YLGHV D PRUH UREXVW EDVLV IRU IXUWKHU LQYHVWLJDWLRQ RI
WKH HIIHFW RI WKH UHGXFWLRQ RI WKH 3V WR 2V XU
WKHU LPSURYHPHQWV ZLOO EH PDGH WR WKH LVREDU FXUYD
WXUH HSUHVVLRQ LQ WKH IXWXUH
8QFRQILQHG GHWRQDWLRQ VLPXODWLRQV DUH QRW RI PXFK
LQWHUHVW WR WKH DYHUDJH EODVWLQJ HQJLQHHU 7KH PDLQ
SXUSRVH RI GHYHORSLQJ SUHGLFWLYH XQFRQILQHG GHWRQD
WLRQ PRGHOV LV WR EH DEOH WR XVH WKHP WR GHYHORS SUH
GLFWLYH FRQILQHG PRGHOV 7KLV ZRUN ZLOO EH XVHG DV D
EDVH IRU WKLV LQ WKH IXWXUH
7KLV UHVHDUFK ZDV NLQGO IXQGHG E 2ULFD 7KH DX
WKRUV WKDQN 6 6FKRFK IRU WKH 16 UHVXOWV DQG LQYDOX
DEOH GLVFXVVLRQV DQG  0RUJDQ IRU WKH 8 YHU
VLRQ RI WKLV 16 FRGH
 VODP 7  GLO -  DQG LOO   
WHQVLRQV WR 6 WKHRU DQDOVLV RI 3
UDWH VWLFN GDWD 7HFK UHS RV ODPRV 1DWLRQDO
 DXGLQ  HIUDQFRLV  6DXUHO 5 3HWLWSDV
 0HWDHU 2  0DVVRQL - HOVNL 9 DQG
RWRY  7RZDUG D WKHUPDO QRQHTXLOLEULXP
PXOWLSKDVH PRGHO IRU KLJK HSORVLYH PHWDOOLF
SDUWLFOHV - QHUJHWLF 0DWHULDOV   
 GLO -  3HUWXUEDWLRQ PHWKRGV DSSOLHG WR
SUREOHPV LQ GHWRQDWLRQ SKVLFV
QDWLRQDO HWRQDWLRQ 6PSRVLXP 
 GLO -  6WHDGVWDWH WZRGLPHQVLRQDO GHWR
QDWLRQ - OXLG 0HFK   
 GLO -  VODP 7  DQG 6KRUW 0 6
IURQW PRGHOV QRQLGHDO HSORVLYH GHWRQDWLRQ LQ
12 Q WK QWHUQDWLRQDO HWRQDWLRQ 6P
 GLO -  DQG 6WHZDUW  6 7KH GQDPLFV
RI GHWRQDWLRQ LQ HSORVLYH VVWHPV QQX 5HY
 KDQ 6 . DQG .LUE  - QDOVLV RI
92LDPHWHU DWD 8VLQJ DQ QDOWLFDO 7ZR
LPHQVLRQDO 1RQGHDO HWRQDWLRQ 0RGHO
6KRFN RPSUHVVLRQ RI RQGHQVHG 0DWWHU -XO
 0  XUQLVK 0 OHUW 7 3 5XVVHOO 
 7 KLWH G YRO  RI PHULFDQ QVWLWXWH
RI 3KVLFV RQIHUHQFH 6HULHV SS 
 ULQJ  3RZHOO 5  XII   DQG 3DU
OLQ 5  7KH VWDELOLW RI GHWRQDWLRQ KHP 5HY
 D -  7ZRLPHQVLRQDO DVHRXV HWRQD
WLRQV 9HORFLW HILFLW 3KVLFV RI OXLGV  0D
 -RQHV   WKHRU RI WKH GHSHQGHQFH RI WKH UDWH
RI GHWRQDWLRQ RI VROLG HSORVLYHV RQ WKH GLDPHWHU
RI WKH FKDUJH 3URF 5 6RF RQG   
 .DSLOD  . 0HQLNRII 5 GLO -  6RQ
6  DQG 6WHZDUW  6 7ZRSKDVH PRGHOLQJ RI
GHIODJUDWLRQWRGHWRQDWLRQ WUDQVLWLRQ LQ JUDQXODU
PDWHULDOV 5HGXFHG HTXDWLRQV 3KVLFV RI OXLGV
 3HWLWSDV  0DVVRQL - 6DXUHO 5 DSHELH 
DQG 0XQLHU  LIIXVH LQWHUIDFH PRGHO IRU KLJK
VSHHG FDYLWDWLQJ XQGHUZDWHU VVWHPV QWHUQD
WLRQDO -RXUQDO RI 0XOWLSKDVH ORZ   XJ
 6FKRFK 6 1LNLIRUDNLV 1 HH  - DQG
6DXUHO 5 0XOWLSKDVH VLPXODWLRQ RI DPPR
QLXP QLWUDWH HPXOVLRQ GHWRQDWLRQV RPEXVWLRQ
 6KRUW 0 4XLUN - - .LDQGD   -DFNVRQ
6  ULJJV 0  DQG 6KLQDV 0  6LPXOD
WLRQ RI GHWRQDWLRQ RI DPPRQLXP QLWUDWH IXHO RLO
PLWXUH FRQILQHG E DOXPLQXP GJH DQJOHV IRU
6 Q WK QWHUQDWLRQDO HWRQDWLRQ 6PSR
 6LFKHO 0  KGURGQDPLF WKHRU IRU WKH LQ
WHUDFWLRQ RI D JDVHRXV GHWRQDWLRQ ZLWK D FRP
SUHVVLRQ ERXQGDU Q  -  YRO 
 7VXJH 6 XUXNDZD  0DWVXNDZD 0 DQG
1DNDJDZD 7 2Q WKH GXDO SURSHUW DQG WKH OLPLW
RI KGURJHQ RJHQ IUHH GHWRQDWLRQ ZDYHV V
 DWW 6 6KDUSH  DOOH 6 DQG UDLWKZDLWH
0  VWUHDPOLQH DSSURDFK WR WZRGLPHQVLRQDO
VWHDG QRQLGHDO GHWRQDWLRQ WKH VWUDLJKW VWUHDP
-RXUQDO RI QJLQHHULQJ
 RRG   DQG .LUNZRRG -  LDPHWHU
HIIHFW LQ FRQGHQVHG HSORVLYHV 7KH UHODWLRQ EH
WZHHQ YHORFLW DQG UDGLXV RI FXUYDWXUH RI WKH
GHWRQDWLRQ ZDYH -RXUQDO RI KHP 3KV 
R RX GHWHUPLQH RXU SUHVVXUH FRQWRXU FXUYDWXUH
IXQFWLRQ E SXUHO HPSLULFDO PHDQV QVZHU HV
 ZRXOG VXJJHVW UXQQLQJ IXOO 16 RI  HTXDWLRQ
PRGHO RYHU D ZLGH UDQJH RI FKDUJH VLHV DQG WKHQ XV
LQJ WKH VLPXODWLRQ UHVXOWV WR KHOS GHWHUPLQH KRZ WKH
SUHVVXUH FRQWRXU FXUYDWXUHV GHSHQG RQ WKH YDULRXV SD
UDPHWHUV RI WKH SUREOHP RU WKHVH UHVXOWV GHYHORS D
SUHVVXUH FRQWRXU FXUYDWXUH IXQFWLRQ WKDW GHSHQGV RQ
WKH x y FRRUGLQDWHV DQG WKH UHOHYDQW SKVLFDO SDUDPJetting Instabilities of Particles from Multiphase Explosive Detonation 
Robert C. Ripley and Fan Zhang 
1888 Brunswick St. Suite 400 Halifax NS Canada B3J 3J8 
Defence RD Canada - Suffield 
PO Box 4000 Stn Main Medicine Hat AB Canada T1A 8K6 
Abstract. Explosive dispersal of granular materials and liquids displays multiple scales of 
jetting  structures  with  smaller  perturbations  often  superimposed  on  larger  structures. 
Perturbations may originate near the boundaries between booster shock-dispersed media 
and outer edge of the charge interfaces often feature a thin casing material that fragments 
and  influences  the  instabilities.  The  present  work  includes  the  situation  of  particles 
saturated with liquid explosive to numerically investigate the jetting instability observed 
in the premixed particles-explosive configuration. Previous experimental observations of 
such  thermobaric  explosives  demonstrated  well-defined  jetting  structures.  Macroscopic 
multiphase flow simulation shows densification and jetting of particles. Numerical results 
are consistent with experimental observations and further the understanding of the origin 
and mechanism controlling the formation of jetting structures and the number of jetting 
instabilities. The likelihood and difference of the jetting instability between the premixed 
configuration and stratified particles-explosive configuration are discussed. 
The formation of post-detonation particle jets 
has  been  widely  observed  in  many  problems 
associated  with  explosive  dispersal  of  granular 
materials  and  liquids.12345  Perturbations  have 
been  shown  to  form  very  early  and  persistent  jet 
structures are apparent in later times. Analysis of 
small-scale  nominal  2  litre  experimental  results 
for  liquids  powders  and  hybrid  mixtures  in  a 
cylindrical  dispersal 
configuration  indicated  correlation  of  the  number 
of jets to an initial particle expansion velocity or 
Gurney  velocity  where  the  casing  mass  was 
replaced  by  the  mass  of  dispersed  media.356  A 
macroscopic  particle 
attraction  model  was 
suggested to demonstrate early-time fracturing of a 
powder  bed  with  subsequent  particle 
structures.6 The fracture spacing within the shock 
timescale ultimately determines the primary jets. 
Explosive Dispersal of Liquids  
Particle  jets  in  liquid  dispersal  may  originate 
near  the  boundaries  between  the  central  booster 
shock-dispersed  media  and  outer  edge  of  the 
instabilities. The fact that particle jets also form in 
the  absence  of  an  outer  casing  both 
experiments7 and landmine or shallow underwater 
explosion  indicates  that  an  interior  instability 
interfaces  often  entail  a 
the  critical  condition.  Small-scale 
experiments  however  have  been  difficult  in 
distinguishing  between 
instability phenomena and their associated origins. 
A recent large-scale experiment45 involving a 
7100 litre liquid dispersal by a central cylindrical 
explosive  booster  i.e.  a  stratified  configuration 
has shown a dual jetting structure where the outer 
boundary  introduces  minor  surface  instabilities 
leading  to  micro-jets  the  edge  of  which  is 
overtaken by major jet structures later in time. The 
number  of  major  jets  was  traced  back  to  nearsurface liquid radial fractures which occur within a 
timescale.  Modeling  results 
showed the major jetting structure triggered by the 
inner booster casing instability.458 In this case the 
number of major jets was dictated by the fragment 
number  of  the  inner  casing  however  the  interior 
perturbation length scale may be generalized by a 
hydrodynamic  Richtmyer-Meshkov 
the  detonation  shock 
entering  the  dispersed  media.  The  RMI  becomes 
considerably more complex for multiphase flow. 
Explosive  Dispersal  of  Stratified  Powders  and 
Explosive  dispersal  of  stratified  powders  and 
hybrid  mixtures  has  also  featured  the  dual  jet 
structures  as  observed  in  experiments.3  Xu  et  al.9 
demonstrated using mesoscale simulations that the 
number  of  major  particle  clustersjets  is  dictated 
by the initial particle number on the inner layer at 
the  explosive  interface.  In  an  attempt  to  link  this 
finding  to  the  macroscopic  real  world  the  innerlayer  particles  were 
interpreted  as  particle 
agglomerates or fragments of a casing between the 
explosive  and  packed  particle  bed  similar  as 
observed in the liquid dispersal. The particle flow 
the  additional  complexity  of  collision 
compaction and agglomeration and may refine the 
length  scale  of  major  jetting.  The  mechanism  for 
the  formation  of  this  major  jet  structure  requires 
further  investigation  using  numerical  modeling 
where  a  packed  powder  bed  surrounds  a  central 
booster  explosive.  Macroscale  modeling  of  this 
configuration  has  only  preliminarily  been 
attempted using compaction6 but without including 
additional  challenging  physics  such  as  particle 
collision particle damagefragmentation and shock 
Dispersal  of  a  layered  hybrid  mixture  may 
have  additional  compression  and  dissipation 
during the shock interaction however experiments 
showed even more jets than either powder or pure 
liquid.36 Experiments also indicated that the jetting 
structure  also  features  simultaneous  liquid  and 
Instabilities from Thermobaric Explosives 
Thermobaric  explosives  TBX  are  another 
system  involving  explosive  dispersal  of  particles 
in which the particles are premixed with explosive 
instead  of  being  stratified  surrounding  a  core.  In 
this  case  there  is  no  large  central  booster  rather 
only a small booster explosive to initiate the TBX 
detonation.  Sometimes  the  particles  are  large 
enough that they do not react within the timescale 
they  combust  during 
dispersal.  Figure  1  illustrates  two  experimental 
examples  of  instabilities  following  detonation  of 
spherical TBX charges. 
instabilities  from 
explosives in DRDC Suffield experiments upper 
early-time multiphase fireball from detonation of a 
thin-plastic-cased  charge10  and  lower  late-time 
particle jets from a thin-glass-cased explosive1. 
Figure 1 upper shows the early-time fireball 
from an aluminized multiphase mixture encased in 
a  light  polyethylene  casing  after  expansion  to  15 
times  the  initial  diameter  where  the  particle 
combustion  already  takes  place.  Small  plastic 
casing  fragments  are  visible  ahead  of  the  bright 
combustion  products  where 
fragments  appears  similar  to  the  number  jet 
structures.  The  instabilities  on  the  surface  of  the 
multiphase  fireball  are  small  and  jagged  with  a 
completely  different  character  from  the  classical 
Rayleigh-Taylor  instability  RTI  that  has  large 
billowing structures. Figure 1 lower shows latetime  particle  jetting  structures  from  a  mixture  of 
large  aluminum  particles 
contained  in  a  light  glass  casing  where  the 
majority of particles remain unreacted. The jetting 
structures here are very long and spiny.  
instability  mechanism  resulting  from  thermobaric 
explosion  numerical  simulation  was  conducted 
using  the  Chinook  CFD  code  MartecDRDC  in 
For illustrative purposes Figure 2 provides an 
example  2D  planar  calculation  at  the  mesoscale 
involving cylindrical aluminum particles 50  200 
m in diameter surrounded by nitromethane NM 
and  adjacent  to  an  air  boundary  representative  of 
the  edge  of  a  TBX  charge.  A  detonation  shock 
the  explosive  and  shock 
compresses and accelerates the particles. Owing to 
the  random  arrangement  of  particles  there  are 
strong  complex  reflections  and  transverse  waves 
as  well  as  particle  deformation  and  densification. 
The  NM  detonation  products  break  out  with  a 
perturbation on the length scale of the particle size 
and  spacing.  This  demonstrates  the  micro-jetting 
phenomena at the particle scale while the particles 
are  lagging  the  combustion  products  front.  The 
agglomeration  while 
the  high  pressure  gas 
products environment prevents melting despite the 
high temperature.11  
flow  of  particles  may 
Damage  to  particles  during  TBX  detonation 
and  subsequent  aerodynamic  breakup  during 
dispersal  and  combustion  are  feasible.11  These 
effects  may  change  the  rates  in  the  jet  formation 
process while in the macroscopic simulations that 
follow  particles  are  assumed  spherical  in  shape 
and polydisperse in size. 
Fig. 2. Mesoscale modeling of aluminum particles 
saturated with nitromethane. White line denotes a 
free-air boundary colour contours are for density. 
The  remainder  of  numerical  results  were 
conducted at the macroscale using multiphase flow 
with fluid-structure interaction. The fluid flow was 
solved  on  a  one-quarter-symmetric  2D  planar 
domain  in  which  the  particles  were  solved  using 
the  group  Lagrange  method 
particle groups. Casing effects were included using 
a conservative closely-coupled method employing 
an explicit finite element solution in LS-DYNA. A 
sequence  of  progressive  meshes  was  used  as 
described  elsewhere.58  The  first  mesh  had  a 
resolution of 0.2 mm and therefore the detonation 
zone  was  not  modeled  in  detail.  The  outside 
charge diameter in all cases was 100 mm.  
In the model particle momentum is controlled 
by  an  enhanced  drag  force  due  to  high-volume
1109
fraction  particle  flow  and  is  represented  by  a 
piecewise  drag  law12  without  directly  modeling 
particle-particle  interactions  including  collision 
compaction  deformation 
Interior Instability 
The  inner  surface  was  the  focus  of  previous 
modeling  studies458  to  explain  the  dual  jetting 
structure in which a central booster was used for 
dispersal while the payload remained inert. In the 
present  work  the  detonation  of  a  thermobaric 
explosive  as  the  payload  is  boosted  by  a  central 
high explosive core. It is therefore unclear whether 
the  detonation  of  the  payload  will  change  the 
interior  instability  from  the  booster  interface 
perturbations.  An  oversized  20-mm-diameter 
booster is considered to examine this problem.  
A mixture of aluminum particles saturated in 
sensitized  liquid  nitromethane  forms  the  TBX 
charge. A particle size distribution of 20  10 m 
was employed. Aluminum particles are treated as 
inert  in  order  to  focus  on  the  particle  jetting 
dynamics.  The  mass  loading  is  63.6  aluminum 
and  36.4  NM.  A  steel  casing  0.8  mm  thick 
separates  the  booster  from  the  TBX  mixture. 
Following our previous works458 the inner casing 
was pre-fragmented into equal-sized fragments. 
The  central  booster  of  TNT  was  initiated  at 
the  central  axis.  Detonation  of  the  TNT  booster 
drives  the  inner  casing  which  in  turn  initiates 
the  NM.  The  bulk  detonation 
propagates  radially  outward  at  5.3  mms  with  a 
mean flow pressure of 6.9 GPa which is travelling 
at  a  deficit  relative  to  the  neat  explosive  due  to 
the  particles.  Pressure 
fluctuations are noticeable due to the randomness 
size  and  placement  and 
consequently in the local concentration field.  
Figure  3  illustrates  the  interior  process.  The 
detonation  propagation  and  shock  acceleration  of 
particles  is  much  faster  than  the  booster  casing 
fragment dispersal velocity 0.43 mms at 5 s. 
Therefore  compaction  is  limited  for  particles  in 
TBX although it is very important for dispersal of 
stratified  dry  powder.  By  25  s  the  inner  casing 
fragments  have  reached  their  maximum  dispersal 
distance  before  being  driven  inwards  by  the 
pressure  of  the  NM  detonation  products.  At  this 
time  the  aluminum  particles  have  already  begun 
venting  into  the  TNT  products  though  the  case 
however the flow remains stagnated until the outer 
edge  rarefaction  arrives  at  the  charge  centre.  The 
instability  may  be  viewed  as  an  RMI  where  the 
perturbation length scale is defined by the number 
of  inner  case  fragments.  Figure  4  shows  the 
growth  of  the  inner  instability.  After  1  ms  the 
particles  and  multiphase  RMI  are 
accelerated by the rarefaction. 
Fig. 3.  Close-up view of TBX charge booster and mixture initiation with inner casing fragments white 
lines and particles black points.  
The  outer  surface  instability  is  certainly  the 
source  of  some  jets  particularly  minor  jets  and 
micro-jets. Considering large jet structures Milne2 
has  provided  a  reasonable  justification  that  the 
Rayleigh Taylor instability RTI takes too long to 
form and therefore is not the source of the particle 
jetting phenomena.  
For  the  present  TBX  configuration  an  outer 
casing  of  1.6-mm-thick  plastic  1.27  gcc  has 
been  used  with  natural  fragmentation  based  on  a 
simple  failure  strain  criterion  f    0.7.  The 
combustion  interface  interaction  with  the  outer 
container  fragments  results  in  very  early  time 
micro-jetting  of  the  detonation  products  through 
the  fractures.  The  container  fragment  number 
initiates  an  outer  contact  surface 
instability  however  this  does  not  later  develop 
into a gas RTI instead the detonation products are 
ultimately entrained by the particle flow. 
Numerical  results  for  a  10-mm-diameter 
uncased  booster  are  given  in  Figure  5.  The 
particles are accelerated initially by the detonation 
shock  and  later  by  the  strong  edge  expansion. 
Particles lag the expanding flow due to the particle 
size effect. At 25 s 28 micro-jets are counted in 
the quarter symmetric model representative of 112 
around the full circumference assuming symmetry. 
For  comparison  a  similarly-sized  pure  NM 
explosive  charge  without  an  outer  casing  has  a 
numerically predicted RTI with only 32 fingers in 
the full circumference that form on a timescale of 
Until  100  s  the  particle  front  is  smooth 
unperturbed  besides 
particle  size  distribution  and  local  concentration 
gradients  and  lags  the  detonation  products  front. 
The particle momentum allows the particle front to 
catch  up  to  the  decelerating  contact  surface. 
Subsequently the particles are readily entrained in 
the detonation products micro-jets. 
front  becomes  unstable  during 
Figure 6 shows the detonation products microjet  instability  and  particle  dispersal  interaction. 
The  particle  front  catches  up  to  the  combustion 
products  interface  between  100  and  200  s.  The 
interaction  with  the  gas  micro-jets  that  accelerate 
the particles due to drag. At 400 s the particles 
have  surpassed  the  detonation  products  extent.  In 
the same timescale a few strong particle jets have 
overtaken those initiated by weaker gas micro-jets. 
The  numerical  result  at  400  s  represents  an 
expansion  of  17  times  the  initial  diameter  and 
shares  features  with  the  experimental  result  in 
Figure 1 upper namely a large number of sharp 
particle micro-jets for which the initial number is 
dictated by the casing fragments. 
The  casing  fragments  have  been  removed 
from the remainder of the calculation to focus on 
the particle dynamics. The detonation products and 
particle  jetting  dynamics  could  be  different  when 
trajectory  and  wake 
entrainment caused by the case fragments. 
The growth of the particle jetting instabilities 
later  in  time  is  shown  in  Figure  7.  The  jetting 
structures  formed  by  micro-jetting  at  the  surface 
have surpassed the fireball they continue to grow 
in  length  using  their  high  collective  momentum. 
The  most  coherent  jets  grow  the  best  due  to  the 
highest wake entrainment.  
Fig. 4.  Close-up view of multiphase Richtmyer-Meshkov instability at the interior boundary of the TBX 
Outer Surface Instability  
Fig.  5.    Casing  fragmentation  and  initial  detonation  products  jetting.  The  particle  front  is  initially 
unperturbed and lags the detonation products expansion and case fragment dispersal. 
Fig. 6.  Early fireball instability and particle dispersal.  The particle front catches the combustion products 
interface and becomes unstable following the gas micro-jet instability. 
Fig. 7.  Growth of particle jetting instabilities in later time. 
Discussion of Late-Time Jetting 
Figure 8 shows the late-time jetting resulting 
from  TBX  configurations  with 
internal boundaries and booster sizes. Calculations 
were performed by remapping onto on a numerical 
mesh of up to 40 mm resolution in the far-field. It 
should  be  noted  that  the  results  in  Figure  8  are 
mirrored for computational efficiency. Real results 
are not symmetric about the circumference rather 
they are more random. 
At  20  ms  the  particle  dispersal  has  slowed 
considerably  and  reached  a  nearly  static  state. 
Three classes of jets are identifiable a streamer 
type  jet  dissipative  or  merged  micro-jets  and 
denser  surface  jets.  Both  the  inner  and  outer 
are  different  between  booster 
configurations  while  the  outer  surface  jets  all 
originated as minor jets. 
The  streamer  jets  formed  at  locations  of 
highest  micro-jetting  caused  by  nozzle-shaped 
fracture openings including being aligned with the 
vertical boundary. While the leading streamer jets 
are quite similar in location and number due to a 
repeatable  mesh  perturbation  the  denser  surface 
jets are quite different. For the smaller booster the 
dense jets appear as merged groups of micro-jets 
while for the larger cased booster the dense jets are 
much  more  distinct  and  are  fewer  in  number. 
Counting  the  jet  number  is  a  subjective  task 
accounting  for  the  number  of  valleys  may  be 
related to the bulk fractures.  
An analysis of the fragment locations showed 
that the location of valleys between merged minor 
jets Figure 8 left corresponded to the position of 
the widest container fragments. The more coherent 
and  denser  surface  jets  were  traced  back  to  the 
widest  gaps  formed  between  fragments  with  the 
highest driving pressure ratio through the fracture 
space. The initial number and pattern of minor jets 
is controlled by the outer container breakup. 
In  order  to  connect  the  late-time  jets  to  the 
the  outer  container 
breakup  was  analyzed  further.  The  fragment  size 
distribution  from  the  LS-DYNA  plastic  failure 
stain  model  is  shown  in  Figure  9  and  exhibits  a 
normal  distribution  of  sizes.  For  comparison 
results  for  a  3.2-mm-thick  casing  are  also  given.  
Assuming symmetry in the full circumference the 
10-mm-diameter  uncased  booster  produced  112 
outer  fragments  in  comparison  with  124  outer 
fragments  for  the  20-mm-diameter  cased  booster 
for the thin plastic container. Examining Figure 8 
considerably  less  than  the  number  of  thin  case 
fragments. This demonstrates that some minor jets 
have  merged  or  dominant  surface 
overtaken other minor jets. For the larger booster 
the dominant jets in late time have each overtaken 
2-3 minor jets in between Figure 8 right.  
late-time  number  of  persistent 
Fig.  8.    Late-time  particle  jetting  instabilities  left  10-mm-diameter  uncased  booster  right  20-mmdiameter booster cased with a pre-fragmented inner casing. Both have natural fragmentation of a thin outer 
container. Results mirrored from the  symmetric model. 
configuration  outer  casing 
achieved  through  the  expansion  of  inert  payload 
which is driven by a central booster.  In the current 
TBX configuration the outer casing expansion and 
fragmentation  are  directly  driven  by  the  massive 
payload  detonation 
itself  instead  of  a  small 
booster.  By  the  time  the  TBX  detonation  shock 
reaches the outer casing wall the effects of booster 
size  have  reduced  or  diminished  see  Figure  10 
however  the  flow  instability  induced  by  the 
booster fragments  remains  connected  to  the  outer 
fragmentation pattern. The smaller booster resulted 
in a few larger fragments i.e. greater than 6 mm 
wide  than  the  larger  booster.  Although  the  outer 
fragment number is similar between booster sizes 
the  detonation  multiphase  flow  and  subsequent 
outer  casing  fracture  location  and  fragment  size 
appear  to  be  significantly  influenced  by  the 
booster  instability  and  thus  may  still  affect  the 
jetting phenomenon. 
in  TBX  detonation 
Fig.  10.  Flow  pressure 
measured at gauges near the container wall. 
The  present  work  explored  the  fundamental 
particle  jetting  phenomena  of  a  TBX  charge 
instabilities.  The 
numerical model did not include particle collision 
and  agglomeration  additional  dense  flow  and 
turbulence  effects  would  serve  to  enhance  the 
particle jets. More challenging features during the 
Fig.  9.  Polyethylene  container  fragment  size 
distribution from the quarter-symmetric model. 
For  both  booster  sizes  with  the  thin  outer 
casing  the  resulting  average  outer  container  wall 
expansion  velocity  was  2.27  mms  prior  to 
failure.  An  average  fragment  width  may  be 
estimated  using  an  empirical 
average  fragment  width 
corresponds  to  137  fragments  around  the  full 
circumference.  Figure  9 
predicted fragments are larger with an average of 
3.2  mm  for  the  10-mm-diameter  booster  and  2.8 
mm for the 20-mm-diameter booster. Similarly for 
the  thick  plastic  casing  with  a  resulting  smaller 
wall velocity the empirical fragment width is 2.7 
mm  compared  with  an  average  of  3.9  mm 
determined  numerically.  The 
deformation  and  the  natural  distribution  of  sizes 
was  triggered  by  the  randomness  in  the  mesh 
precision  and  stochastic  pressure  fluctuations  in 
the  multiphase  detonation.  Since  the  thin-wall 
circumferential strain rate was nearly the same for 
both boosters it appears that the interior instability 
breakup of its outer casing.  
the  20-mm-dimeter  booster  affected 
the  micro-jets  are  mainly 
controlled by the outer container fragmentation.  In 
detonation stage such as dynamic stress bridging 
shock  sintering  particle  damage  and  particle 
fragmentation  may  further  enhance  the  internal 
instability  mechanism.  Thus  the  present  results 
using  simple  calculation  approaches  provide 
qualitative  information  tackling  real  systems  in 
three-dimensions is reserved for future work. Latetime aerodynamic particle-particle interaction may 
improve  the  coherency  of  already  formed  jet 
structures  but  is  not  responsible  for  the  jet 
formation and number. 
Micro-jetting  from  container  fragmentation 
produced  a  strong  outer  surface 
resulting in both persistent jets and merged minor 
jets  while  fragmentation  of  an  internal  booster 
casing  would  still  enhance  the  minor  jets.  The 
inner  booster  size  may  change  the  outer  casing 
fragmentation  leading  to  different  minor  jets.  In 
addition  the  number  of  particle  jets  obtained  for 
the  TBX  charge  in  simulations  is  consistent  with 
experiments and are very different in shape from 
the conical jets produced from stratified dispersal. Experiments and Modelling of Sympathetic Detonation Initiated by Fragmented 
 Weapons and Combat Systems Division 
Defence Science and Technology Organisation 
P O Box 1500 Edinburgh SA 5111 AUSTRALIA 
Abstract.  Various  sympathetic  reaction  tests  were  conducted  on  PBXN-109  donors 
confined  in  mild  steel  cases  initiating  both  bare  and  cased  acceptors  with  different 
standoff  distances.  Fragment  capture  experiments  were  also  performed  to  better 
understand  the  relationship  between  fragment  penetration  and  acceptor  response. 
Concurrent  with  the  experimental  study  the  sympathetic  detonation  initiated  by  donor 
case  was  simulated  using  the  hydrocode  LS-DYNA  with  the  two  DSTO-developed 
Ignition and Growth models.  
    Two techniques  were investigated for  modelling donor case. One  method  was to use 
either the Johnson-Cook strain fracture damage model in conjunction with an equation of 
state or the plastic kinematic model applying the element erosion criteria. Another was to 
treat the donor case as controlled pre-fragmentation where the fragment size type and the 
number distribution were determined using the Mott model considering both the typical 
fragment recovered from the tests and the donor worst credible mass fragment.  
    Finally  the  shock  sensitivity  curve  that  summarises  the  critical  combination  of  peak 
shock pressure P and the derived parameter P2t was developed for PBXN-109 explosive 
based on the simulated pressure-time history results at the interface between the case and 
the charge. For a given sensitivity curve there were two asymptotes which could be used 
to predict the conditions for initiation of detonation of an explosive subjected to shock.  
computational  and  experimental  studies  of  the 
non-ideal  explosive  PBXN-109  a  fully  qualified 
US Navy explosive composed of 64 RDX 20 
aluminium  and  16  binder1-8.  Sympathetic 
Reaction  test  is  one  of  the  IM  characterisation 
tests  examining  the  response  of  an  item  of 
ordnance  upon  detonation  of  an  adjacent  item. 
Various sympathetic reaction tests were conducted 
on PBXN-109 donors confined in mild steel cases 
initiating  both  bare  and  cased  acceptors  with 
different  standoff  distances.  Concurrent  with  the 
experimental  study  the  sympathetic  detonation 
initiated  by  donor  case  was  simulated  using  the 
hydrocode  LS-DYNA9  with 
two  DSTOdeveloped  Ignition  and  Growth  IG  I  and  II 
models.  The  original  model  IG  I  was  derived 
based  on  both  the  detonation  velocity  versus 
diameter and the LSGT experimental data. Due to 
changes  in  ingredients  e.g.  source  leading  to  a 
reduction of shock sensitivity this model required 
modifications  IG  II  to  better  reproduce  the 
experimental results with the new formulations. 
results  and  presents 
This  paper  describes  the  experimental  and 
techniques  for  modelling  donor  case  and  the 
developed shock sensitivity curve that summarises 
the critical combination of peak shock pressure  P
and  the  derived  parameter  P2t  for  the  PBXN-109 
Fig. 1. Cased-cased configuration. 
Fig. 2. Cased-bare configuration. 
Full details of the measurement technique and 
previously48.  The  summary  results  related  to 
initiating  both  cased  and  bare  acceptors  and  the 
fragment capture experiments are outlined here.  
Sympathetic Reaction Tests 
       Figs.  1  and  2  show  the  cased-cased  cased 
donors and cased acceptors and cased-bare cased 
donors  and  bare  acceptors  configurations  of 
sympathetic  reaction  experiments  conducted  on 
PBXN-109 charges 101.6 mm diameter x 300 mm 
long.  The  case  was  9.53  mm  thick  mild  steel 
referred  to  as  the  Generic  Test  Units4.  Two 
acceptors  at  different  separation  distances  were 
initiated  by  one  donor  to  accomplish  two  tests  at 
once.  In  recent  years  there  have  been  some 
changes  in  ingredients  which  have  resulted  in  a 
significant  reduction 
in  shock  sensitivity  as 
measured in the Large Scale Gap Test LSGT. It 
should be noted that the PBXN-109 charges in the 
cased-cased  experiments  still  used  the  standard 
HTPB polymer R45HT whereas charges in casedbare  configurations  contained  the  new  polymer 
and Type II RDX from a different supplier. For the 
cased  donorbare  acceptor  configurations  a 
fibreoptic  array  connected  to  the  Optical  Pulse 
Timer  was  positioned  on  the  back  face  of  the 
acceptors. Each array consisted of 24 optical fibres 
positioned 10 mm apart.  
The  results  for  cased-cased  and  cased-bare 
configurations are detailed in Tables 1 and 2. The 
reaction type for the acceptors was determined by 
examination  of  the  witness  plate  any  recovered 
sections  of  acceptor  casing  and  any  recovered 
PBX.  The  responses  were  classified  according  to 
described in AOP-3910. 
The  results  from  the  trial  involving  a  bare 
acceptor  and  a  cased  donor  show  that  detonation 
events were occurring out to a distance of 789 mm. 
Further out the severity of the response dropped to 
an explosion and at a separation distance of 1089 
mm there was no deformation of the witness plate 
and  approximately  25  of  the  PBX  was  found 
scattered  around  the  area.  Within  the  middle 
distances  tested  609    669  mm  there  was  some 
variation in the response level ranging from a full 
detonation  to  a  milder  explosion.  This  could 
indicate  that  the  response  observed  was  due  to 
fragment  strike  from  the  GTU  case  and  not  the 
shock  wave  generated  by  the  detonation.  Further 
research  would  be  necessary 
statistically  valid  analysis  for  the  cased  donors 
initiating either the bare or cased acceptors. 
Fragment Capture Experiments 
Full  details  of  the  setup  for  fragment  capture 
experiments  were  published  previously4.  A  stack 
of 12 caneite fragment capture packs were placed 
3m  from  the  donor  charge  which  was  filled  with 
standard  PBXN-109.  The  aim  of  recovering 
fragments  from  a  donor  charge  was  to  better 
the  relationship  between  fragment 
fragmentation  was  considered  typical  of  naturally 
fragmenting  steel  and  the  majority  of  fragments 
were  found  in  the  packs  at  ground  level.  The 
average  fragment  mass  was  3.09  g  2.84  g  from 
the ground level packs and the heaviest recovered 
results    cased  donorcased 
Separation Distance mm 
Table 2.  Test results  cased donorBare  
Separation Distance mm 
Donor Case Modelling 
Modelling  the  entire  sequence  from  donor 
case  expansion  to  fragmentation  and  then  impact 
challenging. Added to this is also the difficulty of 
taking into account numerical problems associated 
with  the  case  fracture  and  fragmentation.  The 
following presents the two techniques investigated 
for modelling donor case. 
Donor Case  Natural Breakup 
Properly  modelling  the  natural  fragmentation 
of  the  donor  case  is  difficult.  In  this  work  the 
finite  element  modelling  strategy  with  erosion 
criteria EE has been adopted for modelling donor 
to  fragmentation.  To  capture 
dynamics  of  the  donor  case  rupture  either  the 
Johnson-Cook11  strain  fracture  damage  model 
including  rate  effects  in  conjunction  with  an 
equation  of  state  or  the  plastic  kinematic  model 
has  been  applied.  In  the  EE  approach  once  the 
effective  plastic  strain  in  an  element  reaches  a 
specified minimum value the element is removed 
from  the  computations.  Element  erosion  is  the 
process  used  to  eliminate  elements  during  the 
computation  that  no  longer  contribute  to  the 
overall  response  determination.  While  some  mass 
is  lost  in  the  EE  approach  conservation  of 
momentum  is  insured.  There  is  an  inherent  mesh 
dependency  of  the  EE  approach.  The  correct 
effective plastic failure strain to use in a simulation 
is uncertain and is inter-related to grid resolution. 
In  general  the  correct  value  of  failure  strain 
from  an  erosion  criterion  value 
convergence  study  is  specific  to  the  element  size 
based on a mesh convergence study being used. 
A failure strain of 0.61 has been used in this work 
for the two material models for eroding elements. 
The  Johnson-Cook  JC  damage  model  is  a 
cumulative-damage  fracture  model  that  takes  into 
account  the  pressure  temperature  and  strain  rate 
along  the  loading  path  for  each  material  element 
which  is  represented  by  the  equivalent  plastic 
strain at fracture given by11  
with       TT-TroomTmelt- Troom 
 where    is  the  mean  stress  normalized  by  the 
effective stress  the normalized effective plastic 
strain  rate  D1  D2  D3  D4  and  D5  are  fracture 
constants. The failure criterion of Johnson-Cook is 
based on a plastic fracture strain which depends on 
Hydrodynamic  material  models  such  as 
Johnson-Cook  require  an  equation  of  state  EOS 
hydrodynamic models only compute the deviatoric 
stresses.  The  Gruneisen  EOS  may  be  the  best 
choice for high  velocity  impact regime as  well as 
high speed structure dynamics. The parameters for 
the  Johnson-Cook  model  derived  by  Tornqvist12 
have been used in this work.  
Plastic  kinematic  hardening  PKH  material 
model  is  a  strain-rate  dependent  elastic-plastic 
model  utilized to predict the response of the  steel 
Donor Case  Pre-formed Fragmentation 
Full detailed analytical theory parameters and 
key  equations  characterising  the  donor  stimulus 
are  reported  by  Peugeot  et  al.13  The  relevant 
models for determining the fragment size type and 
the  number  distribution  are  outlined 
Fragment distribution 
The fragment distribution is usually described 
by  the  Mott  model.  Assuming  an  ideally  uniform 
fragment  size  distribution  the  total  number  of 
fragments is defined as  
2                                                    2 
where  NT  is  the  total  number  of  fragments  M0  is 
the  case  mass  kg  and  MA  is  the  fragment 
distribution factor in the form kg 0.5 
where di is the inside diameter m t1 is the case 
thickness m and B the Mott constant kg 0.5 m -76 
B90.562PCJ-0.585 PCJ in GPa                    4         
Donor worst credible mass fragment 
According to Peugeot et al.13 the worst case 
necessarily  the  most  probable  one  since  a  high 
fragments  will  have  masses 
significantly  lower  than  the  heaviest.  Instead  the 
worst  credible  fragment  is  not  the  largest  but  the 
largest  that  could  be  expected  with  a  confidence 
level  CL  between  0  and  less  than  1  to  be  used  in 
the  sympathetic  reaction  prediction.  This  can  be 
calculated with the following equation  
m Mave 2ln1-CL2                                           5        
2   - average mass fragment kg    
For the current generic test unit GTU taking 
the  average  recovered  fragment  mass  2.84  g  as 
shown  earlier  the  donor  worst  credible  mass 
fragment is worked out as approximately 5.79 g at 
a  confidence  level  of  around  87.  This  gives  48 
rows  of  fragments  along  the  donor  case  height 
with  each  row  containing  28  circumferential 
fragments.  There  is  a  small  gap  added  between 
each  fragment.  The  sizes  of  each  hexahedron 
fragment are roughly with width height and length 
of 9.53 6.2 and 11.35 mm respectively. 
Ignition and Growth Models for PBXN-109 
The  IG  model  in  LS-DYNA  was  derived 
from the original work of Lee and Tarver14 and has 
been described more fully in previous papers5-8.  
As  the  original  polymer  R45HT  in  the  PBX 
binder  system  ceased  production  and  the  new 
formulation  carried  out  for  the  new  experiments 
contained the replacement R45HTLO and Type II 
RDX from a different manufacturer from previous 
tests the combined effect of these changes resulted 
in  a  reduced  critical  PMMA  gap  thickness  in  the 
Large  Scale  Gap  Test  LSGT  from  49.8  mm  to 
36.3  mm.  To  take  this  combined  effect  into 
consideration some of the IG model parameters 
I  G1  G2  and  x  in  the  earlier  IG I  model56
required  modifications 
reproduce  the  experimental  results  with  the  new 
established  model  due  to  minor  variations  in 
ingredients is an example of the challenge of using 
a  physics  based  model  for  processes  that  involve 
chemical  reactions.  As  relevant  chemistry  models 
do  not  exist  the  combination  of  physics  models 
validated  by  key  experiments  remains  the  most 
effective way of addressing this cross-disciplinary 
challenge.  Table  3  lists  the  parameters  in  the  two 
Estimating Discretization Error 
Grid  resolution  could  significantly  influence 
the  accuracy  of  the  solution.  Grid-independence 
13 1 t1di 2 t1                  3                                                         
was  evaluated  using  the  Grid  Convergence  Index 
GCI16  estimating  how  much  error  exists  in  the 
computed  responses  due  to  the  selected  mesh 
discretizations.  The  main  formulas  of  the  method 
                          
                       
where Fs is a safety factor 1.25 for 3 grids r is 
grid  refinement  ratio  2  for  constant  grid 
refinement  q is order of convergence from three 
solutions  with  a  constant  r  f1  f2  and  f3  are  the 
finest next coarser and the coarsest grid solutions 
respectively AC is asymptotic check if close to 1 
that  means  the  solutions  are  well  within  the 
asymptotic  range  of  convergence  fext0 is  an 
extrapolated solution at zero spacing. 
      Table 3. Parameters for the two ignition and growth of reaction models for PBXN-109 
Unreacted Equation of State and Constitutive Values15
Reacted Product Equation of State and CJ Values15
Reaction Rate Parameters for 3 Term Model 
Fmixg  FmxGr  FmnGr 
Table  4 summarises  the  GCI  calculation 
details  for  the  detonation  velocities  AC1.0076. 
Based on the convergence study the small values 
of  GCIji  and  AC  close  to  1  a  grid  size  of  2  mm 
was  selected  in  the  initiation  region  and  expected 
to offer an adequate accuracy within a reasonable 
computing time frame. 
Table 4. GCI calculation details for 82 mm charge 
detonation velocity VoD 
Simulation of Sympathetic Reaction Tests 
The  above described  IG  models  have  been 
used  to  simulate  the  sympathetic  reaction  tests.  It 
should be noted that the PBXN-109 charges in the 
cased-cased  experiments  still  used  the  standard 
HTPB  polymer  R45HT  original  IG I  model 
in  cased-bare  configurations 
contained  the  new  polymer  and  Type  II  RDX 
modified  IG II  model. Fig.  3  shows  the 
the  computer  set-up  model  for 
simulating the cased donor initiating either a cased 
Fig. 3. Computer set-up of simulating a cased 
donor initiating a parallel acceptor. 
In  the  simulations  only  a    of  the  structure 
with  two  symmetry  planes  was  modelled.  Nonreflecting  boundaries  were  used  on  the  exterior 
boundaries  of  the  air  domain  to  prevent  artificial 
stress  wave  reflections  generated  at  the  model 
contaminating  the  results.  The  detonator  donor 
and  the  surrounding  air  using  Eulerian  meshes 
the  outer  surfaces  of 
embedded  Lagrangian  meshes  containing 
witness plates and acceptors and steel case for the 
confined acceptors by the penalty-based EulerianLagrangian coupling algorithm. 
Hourglass  modes  are  non-physical  zero 
energy  modes  of  deformation  that  produce  zero 
strain  and  no  stress.  LS-DYNA  has  various 
algorithms  for  inhibiting  hourglass  modes.  It  was 
found  that  both  the  hourglass  control17  and  the 
coupling  types  between  the  acceptors  and  the 
surrounding  air  played  significant 
reproducing  experimental  results.  So  a  systematic 
approach  should  be 
appropriate  hourglass  control  to  minimise  the 
inaccuracy  of  the  solutions.  In  this  work  the 
hourglass  type  1  and  the  penalty-based  coupling 
algorithm has been used. 
taken  for  applying 
The  EOS  parameters  and  properties  for 
Pentolite  booster  steel  and  the  surrounding  air 
used for simulating the UN Series 8 b Gap Test18
were employed here. 
Characteristics of Cased Donor Detonation 
Depending  on  the  standoff  distances  between 
the  donor  and  the  acceptor  the  acceptors  will  be 
exposed to at least the following loading19 
detonation products through the donor air 
Impulse loading from striking fragments 
Impact loading from striking fragments 
o A  combination  of  blast  and  fragment 
loading or fragment blast coupled effects 
For  the  standoff  distances  considered  in  this 
work  the  acceptor  responses  i.e.  detonability 
were  predominately  influenced  by  the  synergistic 
the  combined  blast  and  fragment 
loadings.  Although  the  strike  velocity  of  the 
fragment had hardly affected by the air drag forces 
little  variations  with 
distances  the  impulses  from  the  combined  blast 
and fragment loading had been greatly reduced by 
increasing  standoff  distances  see  Fig. 4.  The 
impulses at various distances can be estimated by 
the  following  exponential  function  fitted  to  the 
simulated pressure-time history data 
where  Im  is  the  impulse  GPa.s  and  sd  the 
standoff distance in m. 
presented in the following.  
for  modelling  donor  case  are 
Table  5.  Summary  of  fragment  velocity  from 
Fragment velocity mms 
LS-DYNA simulations 
Calculated from  Direct 
Fig. 4. Impulse as a function of distance. 
Donor case  natural breakup 
The strike velocity of the fragments Vmax can 
be determined from the following equations using 
Gurney  Energy  Analysis  for  a  finite 
                             7 
                                8 
where    C  is  the  explosive  mass  kg  M  the  case 
the  Gurney  velocity  
coefficient specific to a particular explosive ms 
E the Gurney energy Jkg L is the length m Ro
is  the  case  outer  radius  m  metal  is  the  case 
density and 0  the explosive density. 
There  are  different  methods  to  estimate  the 
Gurney  velocity  and  some  of  the  approximate 
formulae are reported below13 
PCJ is the Chapman-Jouguet Pressure kbar  
where DCJ is the detonation velocity. 
12                   9 
As  shown  in  table  5  the  fragment  velocities 
using Eqns 9 and 10 compared favourably with 
those from LS-DYNA simulations. 
The  experimental  critical  separation  distance 
leading  to  a  detonation  was  240  mm  whereas  no 
detonation  was  detected  for  300  mm48.  The 
simulations  from  both  JC  and  PKH  models 
observation predicting passfail 240300 mm. 
Fig. 5 shows the calculated pressure contours 
at different times demonstrating the establishment 
and  evolution  of  steady  detonation  wave  in  the 
acceptor  for  the  separation  of  240  mm  from  the 
two  material  models.  It  was  shown  that  for  the 
same  failure strain of 0.61 the JC  model resulted 
in  initiating  the  acceptor  with  a  single  fragment 
impact  at  a  slightly  late  time  whereas  the  PKH 
model  initiated  the  acceptor  at  multiple  locations 
indicating multiple fragment impacts. 
Donor case  Pre-formed Fragmentation 
treating  donor  case  as 
controlled  pre-fragmentation  approach  were  in 
excellent  agreement  with  the  experimental  results 
predicting passfail 240300 mm. 
Fig. 6 shows the model deformation at various 
times  after  the  donor  detonation  showing  the 
fragment impact time of around 240 s for the 240 
mm separation distance. 
Fig. 7 shows the calculated pressure contours 
at different times showing the evolution of steady 
detonation wave in the acceptor for the separation 
of 240 mm. Whereas the detonation wave failed in 
the  300  mm  separation  as  shown  in  Fig.  8  with 
much lower peak pressures less than 2 GPa.  
E2 DCJ2.97                                  
Cased Donor Initiating Cased Acceptor CDCA 
The  detailed  results  with  the  two  techniques 
natural  breakup  with  EE  using  JC  and  PKH 
material  models  and  pre-formed  fragmentation 
Fig. 5. Pressure contours at various times for 240 
mm separation  top JC bottom PKH. 
Fig.  7.  Calculated  pressure  contours  at  various 
times for 240 mm separation configuration. 
Fig.  8.  Calculated  pressure  contours  at  various 
times for 300 mm separation configuration. 
Fig. 6. Model deformation at various times for 240 
The time history plots of the pressures for the 
selected elements at various locations as shown in 
Figs.  7  and  8  are  given  in  Figs.  9  and  10.  Once 
again it was clearly demonstrated that the pressure 
values for the elements in the 240 mm separation 
acceptor were progressively building up leading to 
the  detonation  and  an  order  of  magnitude  larger 
than  those  in  the  300  mm  separation  acceptor 
where the pressures were continuously decreasing 
and completely died out eventually. 
Fig. 9. Pressure histories for the selected elements 
in the 240 mm configuration. 
Although  both  techniques  are  capable  of 
predicting  the  acceptor  failure  mode  an  inherent 
mesh  size  dependency  of  the  correct  value  of  the 
failure  strain  and  the  costly  computation  time 
fragmentation  and  then  impact  on  the  acceptor  in 
the  element  erosion  approach  indicates  that  the 
controlled pre-fragmentation method for modelling 
donor case is more attractive. 
Fig.  10.  Pressure  histories  for 
elements in the 300 mm configuration. 
Cased Donor Initiating Bare Acceptor CDBA 
For  this  configuration  due  to  the  extremely 
unreasonable  computing  time  for  modelling  the 
natural  breakup  of  the  donor  case  either  with  the 
Johnson-Cook strain fracture damage model or the 
plastic  kinematic  model  only  the  controlled  prefragmentation technique for modelling donor case 
The  simulations  successfully  reproduced  the 
experimental  observations  as  shown  in  Table  2 
predicting passfail 789849 mm. 
Fig.  11  shows  the  simulated  time  of  arrival 
curve  together  with  the  data  captured  by  the 
fibreoptic  instrumentation  on  the  rear  surface  of 
the  bare  acceptor  for  the  529  mm  separation 
distance.  It  is  seen  that  the  IG  model  can 
accurately reproduce the experimental data. 
and  Kornhausers  curves20  for  PBX-9404  TNT 
Composition  B  and  small-diameter  cap-sensitive 
emulsion  SDCSE  explosive  for  comparison 
reasons. As shown by Kornhauser20 there are two 
asymptotes asymptote of P and asymptote of P2t 
for a given sensitivity curve. Input with P and P2t
lying  in  the  zone  above  and  to  the  right  of  these 
asymptotes  will  produce  detonations  those  in  the 
zone  below  and  to  the  left  of  the  asymptotes  will 
not yield energetic reactions. 
As  expected  the  new  sensitivity  curve  for 
PBXN-109 containing the new binder replacement 
and Type II RDX lies above the original sensitivity 
curve which indicates its less sensitivity and is the 
least sensitive one among the selected explosives. 
Fig.  11.  The  simulated  and  experimental  time  of 
Fig. 12. Shock sensitivity curve comparison. 
Shock Sensitivity Curve 
the  work  presented 
An alternative way of assessing the sensitivity 
of an explosive is provided by the so-called shock 
Kornhauser20. This  curve  summarises  the  critical 
combinations  of  peak  shock  pressure  P  and  the 
experimentally  to  lead  to  initiation  and  allows 
consideration  of a wider  class  of  energetic 
responses than just detonation alone. Based on the 
the  simulated  pressure-time 
history  results  and  several  sets  of  experimental 
data  the  sensitivity  curves  for  both  the  original 
and  the  new  PBXN-109  have  been  developed 
previously78  and  are  plotted  in  Fig.  12  together 
with the newly predicted P P2t combinations for 
sympathetic  reaction  tests  CDCA  and  CDBA 
conclusions have been reached. 
The  two  DSTO-developed  IG  models  can 
confined in mild steel cases. 
The controlled pre-fragmentation method for 
modelling donor case is capable of simulating 
cased  donor  initiating  both  cased  and  bare 
acceptors  for  reproducing  the  experimental 
observations. The EE approach can faithfully 
casedcased  configuration.  However  due  to 
its inherent mesh dependency and the general 
costlier  CPU  time  the  EE  approach  is  less 
The  shock  sensitivity  curve  offers  an 
the  experimental  results  for 
alternative  approach 
sensitivity of an explosive. 
Dynamic Analysis of Structures V 970 Livermore 
Software Technology Corporation 2005.
The author is grateful to Dr David Kennedy at 
Orica  Mining  Services  Australia  for  his  generous Modeling the Response of FluidMelt Explosives to Slow Cook-off
Albert L. Nichols IIIand Samuel Schofield
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94550
Chemical Sciences Division
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94550
Abstract. To understand the violence of fluidmelting explosives subject to an external 
heat source it is necessary to understand the thermal-mechanical-chemical-flow response 
of  the  explosive.  We  build  on  our  previous  success  in  modeling  the  thermal  and 
mechanical  response  in  solid  explosives  by  making changes  to  the  ALE3D  coupled 
physics  code  to  handle  reacting  explosive  fluids.  Beginning  with  a  single  velocity
incompressible  flow  model  we added handling  the  composition  defining  composition 
dependent material properties chemical buoyancy effects coupling to the solid container 
and transition to short time scale calculations. We  describe the model and demonstrate 
how it affects the Comp-B ODTX experiment.
energetic  materials 
It  is  important  to  understand  the  conditions 
spontaneous  reaction  and  their ensuing  violence. 
With this understanding one can design mitigation 
the  probability  of 
spontaneous reaction while the system is subject to 
consequences of that reaction.
One  important  adverse  environment  is  fire 
where  the  energetic  material  may  be  subject  to  a 
explosion. For solid explosives the process of heat 
transfer is simply conductive and can be modeled 
with  a  simple  thermalchemical  code  as  the 
explosive  does  not  move  significantly  during  the 
heating  process.  In  the  past  few  years  we  have 
developed  more  extensive  models 
explosives  which  include  not  only  the  thermal 
transport  process  but  also 
response12  porosity  and  surface  tension3 in  the 
networks4. With this level of detail we have been 
able to successfully model the thermal mechanical 
response of  HMX  based  explosives  undergoing  a 
thermal  build  up  to  explosion.  However  liquid 
explosives  or those that melt early in the heat up 
phase are much more complicated as they require 
a  different  treatment  of  material  motion  effects. 
The  explosive  can  no  longer  be  treated  using  an 
implicit  mechanical  assumption  but  must  make 
assumptions  that  define  the  flow  of  the  material. 
This  flow  changes  the  way  the  energy  and 
composition  are  moved  around  the  system  as 
those  characteristics  are  now  moved  with  the 
material itself in a  convective manner as  well as 
the original diffusive processes.
In  this  paper  we  describe  the  changes  that 
were made to ALE3D5 to model fluid and melting 
explosives.  The  overall  goal  of  this  modeling 
effort  is  to  predict  the  violence  of  the  explosive 
reaction. This means that one needs to be able to 
continuously model the explosive  from the initial 
relatively quiescent pre-ignition phase to the much 
more  violent  post-ignition  phase.  Doing 
requires  that  all  physical  processes  need  to  be 
modeled  during  all  phases  of  the  calculation 
though  not  necessarily  with  the  same set  of 
approximations.  Much  as  we  did  with  solid 
explosives  where  we  model  the  system  using an 
implicit mechanics  scheme  and  then  transition  to 
an  explicit  mechanics  scheme  to  handle  the  final 
reaction phase we look to  construct a model that 
couples  slow  mechanical  and  fluid  processes 
during the pre-ignition phase and then transitions
to an explicit final phase.  These changes included 
adding  models  for  chemically  reacting  fluids 
modeling  the  fluid  interaction  with  its  solid 
confinement and the transition between slow and 
We take these improvements and demonstrate 
their  use  on  the One  Dimensional  Time  to 
eXplosion ODTX on Comp-B. This explosive is 
a melt cast explosive mixture of RDX and TNT.
Modeling Liquid Explosives
In order to model liquid explosives in ALE3D 
we started with an incompressible flow model that 
had been developed to model simple fluid flows.
but does require an implicit pressure and velocity 
solve. The momentumvelocity field is solved with 
a  second  order  accurate  finite  element  method 
resulting  in  a  non-divergence  free  intermediate 
velocity.  A projection step is then applied where a 
Poisson  equation  for  the  pressure  correction  is 
solved  for  and  the  solution  used  to  project  the 
intermediate velocity to a divergence free solution.
For robustness with strongly varying viscosity the 
viscous terms are treated with a first order accurate 
backward Euler time integration.  The convective 
terms are treated explicitly.
Species AdvectionDiffusion
Traditionally  materials  and  their  state  have 
been handled as element centered variables in the 
hydrodynamic  portion  of 
incompressible  flow  model  these  are  handled  as 
node  centered  variables.  The  process  of  updating 
advectiondiffusion  and  a  reaction  step.  The 
advectiondiffusion  step  uses  an  explicit  forward 
Euler advection component and implicit backward 
Euler diffusion scheme. A single iteration is taken 
each time step thereby requiring that the time step 
be  limited  by  a  courant  condition  based  on  the 
fluid  velocity.  The  reaction  step  uses  the  same 
chemical  reaction  framework  used  in  the  rest  of 
the  code  but  uses  the  nodal  temperature  and 
average  pressure  to  compute  the  reaction  rates 
the  user  defined  set of  reaction 
Incompressible Flow Model
Composition Dependent Properties
The incompressible flow model in ALE3D is 
based  on  a  semi-implicit  pressure  projection 
method6.  The  governing  equations 
incompressible variable viscosity model are
where  is  the  reference  density  is  time  and 
space  varying  molecular  viscosity  u  is  the  flow 
velocity  and  p  is  the  dynamic  pressure. The 
incompressibility assumption removes the need for 
a  sound  speed  courant  condition  in  the  solution 
The  fluid  properties  of  viscosity  thermal 
diffusivity  and  species  diffusivity  are  computed 
from the full state of the system. For multi-species 
materials  the  properties  for  each  species  are 
averaged.  For  viscosity  a  volumetric  weighted 
geometric averaging scheme
the  current  state  and 
Where   and   are  the  mixed  viscosity 
species  viscosity  and  species  volume  fraction
The  species  diffusion  constant  is  computed 
using  a  mass  weighted  harmonic  averaging 
Where   and   are  the  effective  species 
diffusion constant the s-j pair diffusion constant 
and the species j mass fraction respectively.
The thermal conductivity  is computed using 
a  volume  harmonic  average  from  the  species 
Boussinesq Buoyancy Approximation
It is typical in an incompressible flow model 
to  treat  buoyance  effects  with  a  Boussinesq
approximation.  In  such  an  approach  the density 
variations are small enough to be  ignored for the 
inertial terms but gravity induced specific weight 
is  not  negligible.  Typically  one  would  simply 
apply a simple volume expansion coefficient. For 
our  purposes  we  forgo  the  simple  expansion
coefficient  for  a  more  complex  effective  density 
computation.  We  define  a  complete  equation  of 
state  for  the  fluid  material  and  then  use  the 
reference  pressure  and  the  current temperature  to 
compute  an  effective  density  that  is  used  for  the 
buoyancy computation. All  equations  of  state  in 
ALE3D are defined in terms of relative volume v 
and  energy  e.  Non-ev  states  are  determined  by 
iterating on the ev guess using a Newton solver 
until  the  a  relative  pressuretemperature  error  of 
the  fluid  material  model  supports 
chemical  reactions  as 
the  case  with  an 
explosive this process of computing the effective 
density  from  the  equation  of  state  naturally 
the  species  density  variation.  This 
chemical  composition  Boussinesq  approximation 
can  then  be  used  to  drive  not  only  temperature 
driven  variations  but  also  compositionally  driven 
Incompressible  FlowImplicit  Hydrodynamics 
In order to predict explosive violence in these 
fluid  systems  one  must model  the  full  system 
during the pre-ignition phase of the calculation as 
this defines the state for the run up to reaction and 
violence.  To  do  this it  is  necessary  to  have  two 
types  of  models  running  simultaneously  an 
incompressible flow model for the fluid explosive 
and an implicit hydrodynamics model for the solid 
components of the system. 
The  fluid  to  solid  coupling  is  handled  as  a
pressure boundary condition. This requires that the 
flow model provide a pressure that can be used in
that  boundary  condition.  We  first  determine  the 
contiguous regions of fluid by doing a connectivity 
search  through the  mesh.  This  allows  the  user  to 
define  multiple  discontinuous  regions  of 
problem space with the same material parameters 
each  with  their  own  average  pressure.  Then  a 
pressure  is  computed  on  each  node  based  on  the 
current  composition
temperature and  reference 
density. This pressure is volume averaged over the 
connected  areas  of  the  problem to  compute  an 
average  pressure. This  average  pressure 
combined  with  the  flow  pressure  to  define  a 
pressure  boundary  condition  for 
hydrodynamics  step.  Since  the  evolution  of  the 
system  is  expected  to  be  slow  this  boundary 
condition is applied explicitly in time.
incompressible  flow  portion  of  the  system  is  to 
remain  fixed  during  the  duration  of  the  problem. 
However if the fluid acts on the containing vessel 
then  that  vessel  would  have  to  respond  by 
changing its volume. Since we expect the volume 
change to be small we accept the volume change 
in the solution and depend on the divergence free 
projection  operator  to  return  us  to  a  divergence 
free velocity field. Since the nodes are allowed to 
move  during  the  calculation  it  is  necessary  to 
reform the matrix during each solution step.
Transitioning  between  Incompressible  Flow  and 
As the explosive starts to react the time step 
will  begin  to  drop.  At  some  point  that  time  step 
will become  small enough that the computational 
time to perform the larger incompressible flow and 
implicit hydro time steps is larger than the time to 
simply  run  the  calculation  with  an  explicit  time 
step. The nominal fluid sound speed is computed 
using the underlying equation of state information. 
From this the explicit courant time step is obtained 
and used to compare with the current problem time 
step.  The  code  automatically  transitions  from 
using  the  implicit  methods  to  using  the  explicit 
mechanics  scheme  when  the  ratio  of  the  explicit
courant time step to the current time step is greater
During that  transition  several  things need  to 
be  done  to  continue  the  computation.  First  the 
compositional data needs to be moved from being 
a  node  centered  quantity  to  an  element  centered 
one. This is accomplished by a simple average of 
the  nodal  values  associated  with  each  element. 
Next  the  state  of  the  fluid  system  needs  to  be 
recomputed  to  be  consistent. This  is  done  by 
making use of the average fluid pressure defined in 
the previous section. The new internal energy and 
relative volume are iteratively computed using the 
compositional state and the fluid average pressure. 
During  the  run-up  to  the  transition  it  is  not 
uncommon  for  the  fluid  velocity  field  to  become 
chaotic. Because  of this although we  could have 
transitioned  the  fluid  velocity  field  to  the  new 
explicit  velocity  we  have  chosen  to  zero  that 
velocity  instead.  This  is  similar  to  what  is  done 
when  we  transition  from  the  implicit  mechanics 
solution to the explicit solution. In the latter case 
the  two  velocity  fields  do  have  very  little  in 
common as one is an average displacement field 
and the other an instantaneous velocity.
smooth  otherwise  the  pressure  transients  can 
overwhelm  the  actual  thermal  variations  in  the 
problem and  could  even  induce  ignition  on their 
Model for Comp- B ODTX Experiment
We  use  the  framework  of  a  Comp-B  ODTX 
experiment to demonstrate the new reacting fluid 
capabilities in ALE3D.
An  example  of  a fluidmelting  explosive  is 
Comp-B  which  is  a  mixture  of  39.4  TNT 
59.5 RDX and  1  wax  by  weight.  We  treat 
Comp-B as a chemical material with two species 
a  reactant  and  a  product.  A  single  temperature 
dependent  viscosity7 is  applied  to  the  chemical 
material  model  and  is  shown  in  Figure  1.  The 
viscosity  model  contains  two  significant  drops 
the  TNT  and  RDX  melt 
temperatures. Both  reactants  and  products  use  a 
simple equation of state
Where  is the density  is the reference density 
and  is the energy per reference volume in GPa. 
The reactant has a reference density of 1.695 and 
the product that of 1. It was decided  that using a 
significantly  smaller  reference  density  for  the 
product  species  would  not  be  consistent  with 
operating  in  an  incompressible  flow  framework. 
The heat capacity for both species is 1.13 Jgm K 
and  the  heat  released  by  the  reaction is  1.2 
Because of all of the changes that the system 
goes through during the transition from an implicit 
solver  to  an  explicit  solution  scheme  we  cut  the 
time step to a thousandth of the courant time step. 
This  allows  the  system  several  time  steps  to 
equilibrate  locally  without  wild  gyrations  in  the 
Assuming  that  the  fluidsolid  interactions 
were handled  properly during the long time scale 
model the transition from long time scale models 
to  short  time  scale  models  is  the most  important 
for  predicting  the  overall  violence  of  the  event. 
The  transition  to  the  short  time  scale  must  be 
Comp-B Viscosity Model
Fig. 1. Viscosity as a function of temperature for 
Comp-B. The two drops in viscosity are due to the 
melting of TNT and RDX respectively.
A simple reaction model is used to transform 
between reactants and products
    0.01exp51.961  27233
Where  is the rate  of  change  of  the reactant in 
inverse  seconds   and   are  the  reactant  and 
product mass  fractions respectively and T is  the 
temperature  in  Kelvin.  These  parameters  were 
derived  from  DSC  measurements  and  ODTX 
calculations assuming that the Comp-B remained a 
solid until it decomposed.
A  2D-axisymetric  model  of  the  ODTX  was 
these  simulations.  The  mesh 
consisted  of  12672  elements  which  were  divided 
into 8 computational domains to allow the problem 
to  be  run  in  parallel  on  8  processors.  Of  these 
elements 3456 elements were associated with the 
explosive and 9216 associated with the Aluminum 
anvil. The mesh was merged so there are no slide 
surfaces between the explosive and the anvil.
The initial temperature for all parts was set to 
293  K.  In  order  to  prevent  thermal  instabilities 
caused by a temperature jump all external surfaces 
of  the  anvil  were ramped  to  the  set  point 
temperature over 0.1 sec. The temperature on the 
outside of the anvil was then maintained at the set 
point until problem termination.
A point in the problem needs to be constrained 
from  moving  in  the  axial  direction  in  order  to 
remove  the  free  translational  degree  of  freedom 
from  the  implicit  mechanics  solution.  We  chose 
the point where the explosive and the anvil meet 
that  has  the  largest  distance  from  the  axis  of 
symmetry. Beyond removing the unwanted degree 
of freedom this also forces the anvil to center on 
the  explosive.  This  prevents  significant  mesh 
skewing as the anvil expands that would occur if 
one were to pick the point on the axis or worse on 
the bottom of the anvil.
In  order  to  drive  the  convective  flow  a  1G 
gravitational acceleration is applied along the axial 
pressure is applied as a boundary condition to the 
inside of the anvil.
In addition to modeling Comp-B as a molten 
explosive it is useful to compare the system as if it 
were a solid. In order to do this we turn off both 
hydrodynamic models treating the system as fixed 
The Comp-B ODTX was simulated as both a 
Fig  2.  Comparison  between  experimental 
fluid  model  and  solid  model for  the time  to 
thermal explosion of Comp-B as a function of 
inverse temperature.
fluid  and  a  solid  with  several  hold  temperatures. 
The results are compared to experiment in Fig 2. It 
is interesting to note that as expected the times to 
explosion  for  the  system  treated  as  a  solid  gives 
to  experimental  results 
reasonable  agreement 
interesting that the time to explosion modeled as a 
fluid  is  faster at high temperatures  and  slower  at 
low temperatures than the equivalent solid model.
the  model  was  calibrated.  It 
Let  us  now  examine  several  states.  Fig.  3 
shows  the  flow  pattern  that  is  set  up  during  the 
early stages of the simulation. At this early stage 
the  TNT  on  the  outside  of  the  explosive  has 
melted  and  being  lighter  than  the  colder  solid 
begins to flow up. The solid sinks and we start to 
form a pool of hot liquid at the top of the ODTX.
This  pattern  brings  hot  and  reacting  material 
together earlier than in the absence  of  flow. This 
can lead to an enhanced reactivity as long as this 
flow pattern is maintained.
Depending on the external hold temperature there 
are two flow patterns that form in late time. In Fig. 
4  we  show  the  high  temperature  flow  pattern. 
Under  these  conditions  there  are  3  distinct  flow 
regions.  Near  the  bottom  we  continue  to  see  the 
sinking  of  the  higher  density solid  in  the  low 
density fluid. In the middle where the fluid is still 
cooler than the anvil we see a standard convective 
flow pattern where the  fluid near the hot surface 
rises  and  the  fluid  away  from  the  surface  sinks. 
Finally  near  the  top  we see  a  different  pattern. 
Here the explosive has become hot enough to start 
reacting. This reaction heats the fluid causing it to 
rise. As the hot fluid nears the anvil it cools  off 
and  tends  to  flow  down.  However  the  reaction 
produces a lower density species whose buoyancy 
will counter the temperature gradient driven flow.
Fig 3. ODTX at hold temperature 488 after 10.5 
seconds. The left half of the figure is a temperature 
in K pseudo-color plot and a 1 second streamline 
of the flow. The right half of the figure is a mass
fraction of the reaction products pseudo-color plot 
and the two melt temperature contours. This plot is 
typical  of  an  early  time  state  where  the  outside 
layer  has  melted  and  the  solid  is  settling  down 
through the lower density fluid.
Fig. 4. ODTX at hold  temperature  488  after 26
seconds. Displaying the same items as Fig 3. Note 
the sinking solid the standard convective flow in 
convective flow in the fully melted explosive.
temperature  fluid  and 
For  low  temperature  hold  temperature  the 
entire explosive has a chance to melt. We show the 
late  time  pattern  in  Fig  5. Here  the  flow  is 
completely  generated  by  the  heating from  the 
decomposition.  Note  that  the  hottest  material  is 
flows  to  the  top  where  it is  cooled  by  the  anvil 
and then slides to the bottom. This flow pattern in 
essence  keeps  the  explosive  cooler  than it  would 
be in the absence of flow thus retarding the onset 
of ignition. The creation of a low viscosity bubble 
as seen by the high temperature contour in Fig. 5 
provided  the  space  for  a  small recirculation  zone 
that helps maintain the integrity of the hot spot. It 
is  also  interesting  to  note  that  as  the  fluid 
equilibrates  with  the  anvil  the  flow  direction 
changes.  During  that  period  the  inertia  from  the 
flow  will  actually  drive  the  low  densityhigh 
temperaturereaction region toward to bottom until 
the buoyancy overcomes the inertia and establishes 
Fig. 5. ODTX at hold temperature 460 after 374
seconds.  Displaying  the  same  items  as  Fig  3.  In 
this case all of the TNT in explosive has melted 
and the flow pattern is driven by the heat release 
from the explosive decomposition reaction.
As the explosive heats up the rate of reaction 
increases to the point where the time step drops to 
where  it  is  more  efficient  to  run  the  calculation 
explicit. We show the pressure and relative volume 
after  that  transition  and  near  thermal  runaway  in 
Fig.  6. There  are  no  transition  artifacts  in  the 
pressure which would have arisen if the  pre- and 
significantly  different.  Also  note  the  location  of 
the high pressure expanding gas near the top of the 
ODTX associated with thermal ignition. In a solid 
explosive  the  ignition  would  either  be  in  the 
center or in a radial shell. This loss of symmetry is 
completely  driven  by  the  gravitational  forces  on 
in  Mb  right  after 
Fig. 6.  The  computed  relative  volume  left  and 
transitioned  from  implicit  to  explicit  solution 
schemes and shortly before thermal runaway. Note 
the  high  pressure  and  increased  relative  volume 
near the top where the system is starting to ignite.
In  this  paper  we  have  described  the  changes 
that were made to ALE3Ds incompressible flow 
model to create an  initial capability  for modeling 
fluidmelting  explosives.  These  changes  included 
adding  support  for  species  concentration  on  the 
fluid  mesh  adding  an  effective  equation  of  state 
for  the  fluid  that  could  be  used  to  provide 
buoyancy  terms  composition  dependent  material 
properties improved fluidsolid interactions and a
mechanism to transition the problem from implicit 
solution  schemes  to  an  explicit  scheme.  All  of 
these capabilities were implemented in both 2- and 
fluidmelting  explosives. 
We have shown that with these modifications 
modeling  the  ODTX  we  have  seen  several 
interesting  features  which  arise  from  the  selfheating of the explosive where the explosive sets 
up its own flow patterns. We have also shown that 
we can smoothly transition from the implicit long 
time  step  solution  schemes  to  the  explicit  short 
time  step.  This  is  a  necessary  step  toward  the 
prediction of violence as this sets the initial state 
for  the  transition  from  the  global  decomposition 
model  to  a  deflagration  model  which  we  have 
shown how to model previously.
development for this model. Currently all species 
move  together  with  the  same  flow  velocity.  This 
implies that there is no gravity induced segregation 
which  could  be  important  especially  when gases 
should  accumulate  at  the top  of  a  device.  The 
incompressible framework ignores the momentum 
change  associated  with  change  of  state  heating 
reacting. This is clearly a deficiency that needs to 
be addressed by going to a compressible implicit 
fluid solution scheme. Such schemes are currently 
being examined. One might also want to consider 
that  the  partially  melted  system  might  be  better 
represented with a multi-velocity model where the 
solid  doesnt  move  because  it  is  packed  into  the 
container while the fluid moves between the solid 
The  authors  would  like  to  thank  the  ALE3D 
team for providing the framework and support for 
the development of this model. The parameter set 
used  for  these  calculations  was  provided  by  the 
early work of Dr. Matthew McClelland. This work 
Department  of  Energy  by  Lawrence  Livermore 
National  Laboratory  under  Contract  DE-AC5207NA27344. The 
acknowledge  the  Joint  DoD    DOE  Munitions 
Technology  Development  Program  JMP
funding to perform this work.CREST Modeling of the Jack Rabbit Series of Experiments 
Nicholas J. Whitworth 
AWE Aldermaston Reading Berkshire RG 7 4PR UK 
Abstract.  Performed  by  Lawrence  Livermore  National  Laboratory  Jack  Rabbit  was 
designed to study the detonation response  of the TATB-based explosive LX-17. In this 
paper the entropy-dependent CREST reactive  burn model is applied to the Jack Rabbit 
data to see how  well or otherwise it can predict the response of the LX-17 explosive. 
Within a number of experimental and modeling uncertainties CREST is able to simulate 
the observed shock desensitization and detonation wave corner turning behaviour in four 
out  of  the  five  experiments.  The  experimental  free-surface  velocity  measurements have 
been modeled without recourse to the additional desensitization criteria used in pressuredependent reactive burn models. 
Two  important  phenomena  pertinent  to  the 
detonation performance of triaminotrinitrobenzene 
TATB-based  explosives  are  detonation  wave 
corner turning and shock desensitization. Although 
these  have  been  studied  individually  in  practical 
applications  both  processes  could  be  present 
concurrently.  To  address  this  Hart1  conducted  an 
interesting  series  of  experiments  called  Jack 
Rabbit  designed  to  study  both  detonation  wave 
corner  turning  and  shock  desensitization  in  the 
explosive LX-17 92.5 TATB 7.5 Kel-F. 
Corner  turning  refers  to  the  relative  inability 
of  a  detonation  wave  to  overcome  divergence  in 
the  flow  caused  by  a  sudden  change  in  its 
propagation  direction.  TATB-based  explosives 
exhibit  relatively  long  detonation  reaction  zone 
lengths of 2-3mm.2 As a result their propagating 
detonation  waves  can  weaken  markedly  when 
attempting to turn sharp corners. This can lead to 
sustained  non-reacted  andor  partially  reacted 
pockets  of  explosive  dead-zones  being 
behind  in  the  corner  turn  region.3-6  The  first 
objective  of  Jack Rabbit  was to test the ability  of 
LX-17 detonation waves to propagate around two 
90 corners of an embedded steel plate. 
The  term  shock  desensitization  describes 
the  reduced  response  of  explosives  to  complex 
shock  loading  e.g.  shock  reflections  sequential 
shocks  and  detonation  extinction.  Data  on  the 
latter  is  scarce.  Campbell  and  Travis7  and  Dick8
observed  detonation  waves  in  PBX  9404  94 
HMX  3  NC  3  CEF  and  PBX  9502  95 
extinguished  upon  propagating  into  pre-shocked 
explosive.  For  Jack  Rabbit  it  was  hypothesized 
that  if  the  LX-17  detonation  waves  successfully 
turned  the  corners  of  the  embedded  plate  they 
would  then  run  into  pre-compressed  explosive. 
The second objective of Harts experiments was to 
see if detonation extinction would occur in LX-17. 
Jack Rabbit has provided a wealth of data for 
validating reactive burn models. Many of these use 
pressure-dependent  reaction  rates  and  require 
additional modifications  to  model  complex  shock 
phenomena.  CREST9  is  based  on  analysis  of  inmaterial gauge data10 from which it was concluded 
that  to  first  order  reaction  rate  is  dependent  on 
shock strength. CREST depicts the shock strength 
by using a function of entropy  of the non-reacted 
explosive.11 No additional modifications are made 
to  model  shock  desensitization.  In  this  paper 
CREST  is  applied  to  the  Jack  Rabbit  data  to  see 
how well it can predict the detonation response of 
The  Jack  Rabbit  series112  consisted  of  five 
ambient  temperature  experiments  labeled  2021E 
PT3 PT4 PT5 PT6 and PT7 see Fig. 1. In each 
trial  a  slapper  detonator  was  used  to  initiate  a 
1.80gcm3  ultrafine  TATB  UF-TATB  booster 
which in turn ignited an LX-17 main charge. In the 
detonator a pellet of LX-16 96 PETN 4 FPC 
461  ignites  driving  a  0.127mm-thick  aluminium 
flyer  onto  the  flat  surface  of  the  booster.  The 
detonators  were  housed  in  steel  plates  which 
along with the boosters were set within the LX-17 
charges.  The  main  charge  itself  was  sandwiched 
between  two  6mm-thick  aluminium  plates  of  the 
same diameter. To allow for detonator cabling and 
assembly  the  LX-17  charge  was  parted  along  a 
plane running along the bottom of the steel plate. 
Plastic shims 0.05mm thick were placed between 
the  two  LX-17  parts  to  establish  a  uniform  gap 
which was back-filled with APC silastic. 
The interesting aspect of the geometry is that 
the  steel  plate  serves  as  a  shadowplate  which 
protects  the  layer  of  LX-17  above  it  from  the 
initial  detonation  of  the  booster and main  charge. 
For this explosive layer to detonate the detonation 
waves have to propagate around the corners of the 
shadowplate  and  into  the  LX-17  region  above. 
However the difficulty of detonation wave corner 
turning  in  LX-17  is  muddied  by  the  fact  that  the 
explosive  located  above  the  detonator  housing  is 
subjected to weak shock compression as the initial 
detonation wave propagates below the steel plate. 
The  variation  in  the  experiments  centered  on 
the  design  of  the  shadowplate13  coupled  with  the 
thickness of LX-17 above it. In PT3-PT6 the steel 
plates  were  10mm  thick  and  had  diameters  of 
43mm  PT3  and  PT4  or  86mm  PT5  and  PT6. 
This  tests  whether  the  difference  in  distance  the 
detonation  wave  has  to  travel  in  LX-17  before 
meeting  the  first  90  corner  of  the  shadowplate 
would alter the corner turning and desensitization 
behaviour. PT7 also employed an 86mm-diameter 
plate  but  the  outer  contour  was  defined  by  two 
intersecting  spherical  surfaces.  Here  the  LX-17 
detonation  wave  has  only  to  propagate  around  a 
sharp point rather than two 90 corners. 
The  LX-17  channel  thickness  was  10mm  in 
shots PT3 and PT5 which is roughly equal to the 
confined  failure  diameter  in  LX-17.6  This  was 
doubled to 20mm for PT4 and PT6 to see whether 
the  increased  thickness  would  invite  detonation 
above  the  shadowplate.  In  trial  PT7  the  LX-17 
channel thickness varied over the range 10-30mm. 
The trials were diagnosed via Photon Doppler 
Velocimetry  PDV  probes  flash  radiography 
framing  cameras  and  detonation  timing  pins. 
Eight PDV probes recorded the motion of the top 
aluminium  plate  hereafter  referred  to  as  the 
diagnostic  plate  with  the  locations  given  by  the 
numbers above the hollow arrows in Fig. 1. 
A persistent dead-zone was observed between 
the  shadow  and  diagnostic  plates  in  each  of  the 
five  shots.1  However  both  its  shape  and  the 
diagnostic  plate  were  distinctly  different.  It  was 
concluded  that  desensitization  is  the  principal 
cause  of  the  dead-zones  seen  pre-shocking  the 
LX-17 above the steel plate renders this part of the 
subsequently propagate into this region. 
CREST Reactive Burn Model914
The  entropy-dependent 
CREST  is  allied  with  both  a  non-reacted  and 
detonation  products  equation  of  state  EOS.  A 
finite strain EOS is used to model the non-reacted 
explosive while the reaction products are modeled 
using  a  modified  JWL  EOS  in  which  additional 
terms  are  added  at  high  densities  to  match 
overdriven  detonation  data.  The  ISE  model15  is 
used to evaluate the partially reacted EOS where it 
is assumed that the solid and gaseous phases are in 
pressure  equilibrium  but  thermally  isolated.  To 
account  for  porosity  both  component  EOSs  are 
formulated at theoretical maximum density and the 
Snowplough  porosity  model  is  used.  An  absolute 
shock strength threshold below which no reaction 
can occur is built into the reaction rate equations. 
Fig. 1. Cylindrical cross-sections of Jack Rabbit trials 2021E PT3 PT4 PT5 PT6 and PT7 dimensions in 
mm. The coloured graphic in the bottom right-hand corner shows some of the trial features in more detail.  
Calculational Details 
Numerical  simulations  of  Jack  Rabbit  were 
performed  using  an 
in-house  2D  Eulerian 
hydrocode  which  incorporates  CREST.  A  mesh 
density  of  50  zonesmm  was  employed  which  is 
to  accurately  resolve  a  range  of 
in  TATB-based  explosives  using 
CREST.14  The  top  left-hand  plot  in  Fig.  2  shows 
the calculational set-up of  one  of the Jack  Rabbit 
shots  PT5.  Due  to  the  axis  of  symmetry  the 
illustrations  from  the  simulations  show  only  half 
of the geometry and they are also rotated through 
90 in comparison to the cross-sections in Fig. 1. 
The LX-16 pellet was modeled using programmed 
burn with a JWL EOS.16 Model parameters for the 
inert  materials  were  taken  from  the  Steinberg 
Compendium17  including  the  thin  silastic  layer 
which was modeled explicitly in the simulations. 
The  UF-TATB  and  LX-17  regions  were 
modeled  using  CREST.  The  model  for  UFTATB18 was calibrated to detonation data from  
Fig. 2. Density and burn fraction colour plots from the simulation of experiment PT5. Key A  detonation 
wave B  weak shock from initiation of LX-16 pellet 0.1-0.2 GPa C  shock from detonation of UFTATB and LX-17 1-2 GPa D  dead-zone in booster E  pre-compressed LX-17 F  corner turning 
dead-zone G  interaction of high pressure shocks  with pre-compressed explosive  H   first detonationwave-induced jump-off of diagnostic plate I  persistent dead-zone in LX-17 behind the shadowplate. 
hemispherical  booster  experiments19  which  used 
the  same  detonator  and  size  of  booster  as  Jack 
Rabbit.  Due  to  their  similarity  in  composition 
CREST parameters for PBX 9502 were used as a 
starting  point  to  develop  a  model  for  LX-17 
explosive  01.90  gcm3.  Published  LX-17 non- 
reacted Hugoniot data202122 is very similar to that 
for  PBX  95022324  and  hence  a  non-reacted  EOS 
for  PBX  950214  is  used.  Since  the  detonation 
propagation  behaviour  of  the  two  explosives  is 
sufficiently  different  the  reaction  rate  andor  the 
products EOS must be changed. An approach that 
was  successful  in  matching  LX-17  size-effect 
data6  was  to  use  a  reaction rate  for  PBX  950225 
but  to  incorporate  a  more  suitable  detonation 
products EOS for LX-17.26
Figure 2 shows a series of density colour plots 
scale covers 0 to 9 gcm3 at different times from 
initiation  of  the  LX-16  pellet  for  shot  PT5.  The 
plot  in  the  bottom  right-hand  corner  shows  the 
burn fractions at the same time as the final density 
plot  the  colour  scale  runs  from  0  unburnt  to  1 
fully reacted. When the LX-16 pellet detonates a 
shock is propagated through the steel backing and 
relays  0.1-0.2  GPa  pressures  to  the  LX-17 
explosive  behind  B.  A  short  time  later  the 
booster  detonates  followed  by  the  main  charge 
which sends a stronger shock through the steel and 
into the LX-17 explosive between the shadow and 
diagnostic plates. This shock C relays 1-2 GPa 
pressures  to  this  explosive  region  and  causes  a 
to  be  prelarge  proportion  of 
compressed  E  before 
the  detonation  wave 
reaches  the  first  90  corner  of  the  shadowplate. 
Subsequently the LX-17 detonation wave is quite 
successful  at  turning  this  first  corner  with  only  a 
relatively  small  volume  of  partially  reacted 
material left behind F. 
The  wave  from  the  corner  turn  initially 
interacts with the pre-compressed explosive at the 
second 90 corner of the steel plate. The pressure 
of the shock wave at this point is 10 GPa. Shortly 
afterwards t12s as a result of first interaction 
of the LX-17 detonation wave with the diagnostic 
plate H a further shock is reflected into the precompressed  region.  This  shock  is  stronger  15 
GPa than the wave resulting from the corner turn 
and it catches up and overtakes the weaker shock 
at  15s.  No  reaction  is  observed  behind  these 
shocks  G  as  they  propagate  down  the  precompressed explosive channel the increase in the 
function  of  entropy  is  not  sufficient  to  raise  its 
value above the shock strength threshold built into 
CRESTs  reaction  rate.  As  a  result  a  persistent 
dead-zone is observed behind the shadowplate I. 
Quantitative  assessments  are  made  through 
comparison  of  the  experimental  and  calculated 
diagnostic plate. A timing correction of 1.5s was 
added  to  the  calculated  times  to  account  for  the 
experimental  delay  between  current  zero  time  of 
start of current in the fireset circuit and initiation 
of  the  LX-16  pellet.27  The  calculated  velocity 
corresponding experimental data in Fig 3. Overall 
there is excellent agreement to experiment over the 
time frame shown. Calculationally jump-off at the 
0  20  30  and  35mm  probe  locations  to  velocities 
of 0.025cms is due to arrival of the 1-2 GPa 
free-surface  velocity  histories  of 
for  PT5  are  compared  with 
shock  relayed  to  the  LX-17  explosive  behind  the 
steel plate as the booster and main charge detonate. 
The  jump  to  velocities  in  excess  of  0.1cms  at 
these positions is the plate responding to the shock 
the  pre-compressed 
Fig  3.  Comparison  of  experimental  solid  lines 
and  calculated  dashed  lines  axial  free-surface 
velocity histories for shot PT5. 
At  probe  positions  greater  than  the  radius  of 
the steel plate 45 55 65 and 75mm experiment 
and calculation both show that the diagnostic plate 
responded  to  the  LX-17  detonation  and  produced 
jump-off  velocities  of  0.2cms.  The  calculated 
jump-off  times  and  velocities  agree  well  with 
experiment in particular the jump-off times are in 
the  correct  order  55  45  65  and  finally  75mm 
which  indicates  that  the  detonation  wave  turning 
around the end of the steel plate is well modeled. 
The variation in jump-off velocity with position is 
due to the detonation wave striking the diagnostic 
plate at various angles of incidence see Fig 2. 
An  anomaly  observed  in  Fig.  3  is  the  poor 
agreement to the initial response of the diagnostic 
plate  at  the  0  and  20mm  probe  positions.  Here 
once  the  booster  and  main  charge  detonate  the 
resulting  1-2  GPa  shock  imparted  to  the  LX-17 
channel has to propagate through material that has 
already seen the very  weak 0.1-0.2 GPa shock 
resulting  from  initiation  of  the  LX-16  pellet.  The 
probable cause of the disagreement at these probe 
positions is errors in the non-reacted EOS for LX17 at very low pressures almost certainly linked to 
using  the  Snowplough  model  to  account  for 
porosity  in  CREST.  The  observed  discrepency  at 
small radii is common to the velocity comparisons 
for all five shots in the Jack Rabbit series.  
Trial PT6 was very similar to PT5 except that 
the  LX-17  channel  thickness  was  increased  to 
20mm to see whether this would invite detonation 
behind  the  shadowplate.  This  change  results  in 
differences in the simulated behaviour of PT6 see 
Fig.  4  in  comparison to  that  shown  in  Fig. 2  for 
PT5. The detonation wave propagating around the 
first 90 corner of the shadowplate is very similar 
to that seen for shot PT5 with an almost identical 
region of partially reacted material left behind F. 
In  PT5  the  whole  of  the  LX-17  channel  is  precompressed  before 
the  detonation  wave  can 
propagate into this region. However by increasing
the  LX-17  channel 
detonation  wave  A  is  now  able  to  propagate 
around  the  back  of  the  shadowplate  for  a  short 
distance before the 1-2 GPa shock C can fully 
pre-compress  the  channel.  This  observation  is 
corroborated by the experimental radiographs.1
Once  the  detonation  wave  interacts  with  the 
pre-compressed explosive it is extinguished. High 
pressure shocks in excess of 20 GPa subsequently 
propagate  through  the  pre-shocked  LX-17  in  the 
region  to  the  right  of  the  diagnostic  plate.  Some 
partial reaction is triggered behind them J due to 
the  function  of  entropy  rising  above  the  models 
reaction threshold. However the reaction rates are 
fairly  slow  and  the  chemical  energy  released  in 
this region is 10 to 50 of that available. 
Comparison  of  the  measured  and  calculated 
free-surface velocity histories for PT6 is shown in 
Fig. 5. At probe positions beyond the radius of the 
steel  plate  45  55  65  and  75mm  both  the 
experimental  and  calculated  velocities  show  that 
the  diagnostic  plate  is  accelerated  by  the  LX-17 
detonation wave producing jump-off velocities in 
excess of 0.2cms. The calculated jump-off times 
and  velocities  at  these  positions  are  in  good 
agreement with experiment. 
First movement  of  the  diagnostic  plate  at  the 
30 and 35mm positions and the jump in velocity 
on the 20mm record at 16.5s is in response to 
the  strong  shocks  propagating  down  the  channel. 
The  calculated  velocities  at  these  positions  are 
slightly  over-predicted  compared  to  experiment. 
This  could  indicate that  the model  is  too  reactive 
behind the shocks that propagate through the pre- 
compressed explosive in the region to the right of  
Fig 4. Density and burn fraction colour plots from 
the simulation of PT6. Key is as per Fig 2 plus  
J - partial reaction in LX-17 behind shadowplate. 
the diagnostic plate where some partial reaction is 
observed.  A  factor  here  could  be  the  reaction 
threshold assumed in the model for LX-17 which 
in terms of pressure is 6.8 GPa. 
At  20s  the  shock  waves  converge  on  the 
axis 0mm and the measured velocity increases to 
0.15cms.  However  the  analogous  calculated 
velocity is significantly in excess  of this value as 
indicated  by  the  trace  going  off  the  scale.  The 
assumption  of  axial  symmetry  in  the  simulations 
generates very high pressures when the waves hit 
the axis which can then cause the calculations to 
terminate  early.  Overall  up  to  this  time  the 
simulation  gives  very  good  agreement  to  the 
experimental free-surface velocity histories. 
The poor agreement obtained to the measured 
velocity data coupled with differences observed in 
dead-zone  formation  between  calculation  and 
experiment  suggests  that  the  detonation  wave 
turned  the  corner  around  the  sharp  point  too 
readily  in  the  simulation  of  shot  PT7.  This  could 
be  due  to  experimental  differences  in  LX-17 
detonation wave corner turning behaviour between 
propagation  around  a  single  point  and  two  90 
corners  thats  not  accounted  for  in  the  CREST 
predictions. For TATB-based explosives it is also 
known that their corner turning behaviour is not as 
experimentally  reproducible  as  other  detonation 
data.56 Any gaps present between the shadowplate 
and  adjacent  explosives  upon  assembling  the 
experiment could also account for the differences. 
One  way  found  to  calculationally  make  it 
more difficult for a detonation wave to spread out 
upon  meeting  a  sudden  change  in  geometry  is  to 
increase the value of a coefficient B1 in CRESTs 
non-reactive  EOS.  This  parameter  which 
dimensionless is related to the initial curvature of 
the  Hugoniot.  Keeping  within 
acceptable  limits  this  gives  a  convenient  tuning 
parameter  to  investigate  the  calculated  corner 
turning  behaviour  and  to  examine  whether  such 
changes  are  then  able  to  better  explain  the 
experimental  observations.  Figure  7  shows  a 
selection  of  CREST  calculated  Hugoniot  curves 
for LX-17 for different values of B1. These curves 
which pass through the origin as a result of using 
the Snowplough model to account for porosity lie 
within the spread of the experimental data for both 
LX-17202122  red  squares  and  PBX  95022324
black  circles.  A  repeat  simulation  of  PT7  was 
performed  but  with 
the  non-reacted  EOS 
parameter  B1  increased  from  its  default  value  of 
10.0 to 18.0 which from Fig. 7 is approaching the 
limit  of  what  may  be  deemed  an  acceptable 
The  revised  calculated  free-surface  velocity 
histories are compared to experiment in Fig. 8. The 
simulated results are now in better agreement with 
experiment and the quality of the calculated fit is 
comparable to that obtained to the velocity data for 
shots PT5 and PT6. By increasing the value of B1
in the non-reactive EOS the detonation wave finds 
it much more difficult to overcome the divergence 
in the flow as it spreads out from the corner. As a 
result  the  explosive  behind  the  shadowplate  is 
Fig  5.  Comparison  of  experimental  solid  lines 
and  calculated  dashed  lines  axial  free-surface 
velocity histories for shot PT6. 
Using the same model that gives a good match 
to  the  recorded  velocity  data  for  PT5  and  PT6  a 
relatively poor fit is obtained to the corresponding 
measurements  for  shot  PT7  see  Fig  6.  This  trial 
also employed an 86mm diameter shadowplate but 
the detonation wave has only to propagate around 
a sharp point rather than two 90 corners. In the 
propagate around this point and into the explosive 
layer behind the shadowplate before this volume is 
fully pre-compressed by the weak shock resulting 
from the initial detonation of the booster and main 
charge.  However  the  PT7  radiograph  shows  no 
evidence of detonation behind the shadowplate.1
the  detonation  wave 
Fig  6.  Comparison  of  experimental  solid  lines 
and  calculated  dashed  lines  axial  free-surface 
velocity histories for shot PT7. 
fully pre-compressed before the detonation waves 
can propagate behind it. A persistent dead-zone is 
thus  calculated  behind  the  shadowplate  as  per 
experimental observations. 
Fig 7. Effect of varying parameter B1 in CRESTs 
non-reacted EOS for LX-17 01.90 gcm3. 
Fig  8.  Comparison  of  experimental  solid  lines 
and  calculated  dashed  lines  axial  free-surface 
velocity  histories  for  shot  PT7.  LX-17  CREST 
Repeat  simulations  of  shots  PT5  and  PT6 
were performed using the same value of B1 18.0 
that gives a good match to the free-surface velocity 
histories for PT7. However poor agreement to the 
measured  velocity  data  from  these  two  shots  was 
obtained  the  respective  matches  to  experiment 
were distinctly different from those shown in Figs. 
3  and  5  where  the  simulations  used  the  default 
Experiment  PT3  contained  a  43mm-diameter 
shadowplate combined with a 10mm-thick LX-17 
channel located behind it. Again using the default 
CREST model for LX-17 that fitted shots PT5 and 
PT6  a relatively  poor  match  was  obtained  to  the 
experimental  free-surface  velocity  data  for  this 
shot. As for PT7 the calculated results show that 
the  detonation  wave  turns  the  corners  of  the 
shadowplate too readily in the simulation of PT3. 
The  understanding  of  what  is  happening  in  this 
experiment  is  more  complex  than  the  previous 
shots since due to there only being 2.5mm of run 
in LX-17 before the wave arrives at the first corner 
of  the  shadowplate  the  detonation  wave  is  likely 
to  be  less  than  fully  mature  at  this  point.  It must 
then cross the thin APC silastic layer which could 
further  reduce  its  strength.  These  considerations 
could  have  a  significant  effect  on  the  subsequent 
corner turning behaviour and response of the LX17  main  charge.  Due  to  a  lack  of  relevant 
experimental data it is not known whether CREST 
is  correctly  predicting  the  strength  of  the  LX-17 
detonation  wave  at 
shadowplate in the simulation of shot PT3. 
the  first  corner  of 
To examine whether changing the value of the 
coefficient B1 in the non-reactive EOS for LX-17 
can  help  to  better  explain  the  PT3  experimental 
results the simulation was re-run with the value of 
B1 increased from 10.0 to 15.0. Due to the lack of 
low  pressure  Hugoniot  data  on  LX-17  this  is  a 
reasonable change based on the CREST calculated 
Hugoniot  curves  shown  in  Fig.  7.  The  measured 
free-surface  velocity 
histories  for  PT3  are  compared  in  Fig.  9.  Once 
again  by  changing  the  calculated  corner  turning 
distance  within  uncertainties  in  the  LX-17  nonreactive  EOS  it  is  possible  to  reproduce  the 
majority of the experimental velocity records.  
revised  calculated 
Experiment  PT4  was  very  similar  to  PT3 
except the LX-17 channel thickness was increased 
to 20mm. With the default LX-17 CREST model 
the simulated results show that this change results 
sandwiched  between  the  shadow  and  diagnostic 
plates.  However  the  experimental  radiographs 
show  a  large  dead-zone  behind  the  shadowplate 
with  no  evidence  of  detonation  in  the  LX-17 
channel.1  As  a  result  the  calculated  free-surface 
velocity histories of the diagnostic plate are in very 
poor agreement to experiment. 
Additional  simulations  of  PT4  were  carried 
out  where  the  coefficient  B1  in  the  LX-17  non
1144
reacted  EOS  was  again  increased  in  value  to  see 
whether this could better explain the experimental 
observations.  Within  physically  justifiable  limits 
it was not possible to get close to reproducing the 
PT4  experimental results.  The  calculated  velocity 
histories  did  however  start  to  slowly  converge 
increasing values of B1. 
the  experimental  measurements 
Fig  9.  Comparison  of  experimental  solid  lines 
and  calculated  dashed  lines  axial  free-surface 
velocity  histories  for  shot  PT3.  LX-17  CREST 
Discussion of Results 
The  Jack  Rabbit  series  of  experiments  have 
provided  a  very  challenging  set  of  data  against 
which to test reactive burn models. This is in part 
due  to  some  unexpected  observations  from  the 
data  obtained.  For  example  Table  1  gives  the 
positions  and  times  of  where  the  diagnostic  plate 
initially  responds  to  the  detonation  of  the  LX-17 
explosive. For experiment PT4 the distance from 
the edge  of the steel plate to where this occurs is 
significantly  greater  than  for  the  other  four  shots. 
In comparison to PT3 which used the same-sized 
shadowplate  43mm-diameter  but  had  a  thinner 
layer  10mm  of  LX-17  sandwiched  between  it 
and the diagnostic plate it was expected that this 
initial  jump-off  would  occur  closer  to  the  axis  in 
PT4 since the thicker LX-17 channel 20mm was 
shadowplate. In fact the opposite occurred which 
suggests  that  the  detonation  wave  corner  turning 
was  very different in these two shots  where there 
is only a short distance of run 2.5mm in LX-17 
invite  detonation  behind 
before  the  detonation  wave  reaches  the  first  90 
corner  of  the  steel  plate.  Hence  experiment  PT4 
seems an outlier in the Jack Rabbit series perhaps 
the reason why it has not been possible to get close 
to fitting the data from this trial. 
Table 1. Experimental distances and times of first 
detonation-wave-induced 
aluminium alloy diagnostic plate. 
CREST is able to accurately predict the freesurface  velocity  data  for  PT5  and  PT6.  However 
on  applying  the  same  LX-17  model  to  shots  PT3 
and PT7 relatively poor matches were obtained to 
the  velocity  measurements  from  these  trials. This 
could indicate deficiencies in our current modeling 
to  correctly  model 
detonation  wave  corner  turning  around  a  sharp 
point  PT7  rather  than  two  90  corners  PT5 
and PT6 and incorrect prediction of the strength 
of  the  detonation  wave  in  LX-17  after  2.5mm  of 
run once detonation is transferred from the booster 
sensitivity  to  uncertainties  in  the  geometries  e.g.
variations in the density distribution in UF-TATB 
boosters  may  also  help  explain  some  of  the 
experimental  observations.  In  particular  with  its 
flying  saucer  shadowplate  PT7  is  likely  to  be 
more  difficult  to  assemble  without  gaps  present 
than the other shots in the series. 
The  simulated  results  have  been  found  to  be 
very sensitive to small changes in the non-reacted 
EOS for LX-17 in the low pressure regime where 
there  is  a  lack  of  suitable  Hugoniot  data.  Such 
changes  have  a  significant  effect  on  the  corner 
turning  behaviour  and  the  subsequent  dead-zone 
formation observed in the Jack Rabbit simulations 
they alter the relative influences of corner turning 
failure and weak shock compression on the overall 
response.  Within  these  EOS  uncertainties  it  is 
possible to  simulate the free-surface  velocity data 
from  shots  PT3  and  PT7  by  adjusting  one  of  the 
parameters B1 in CRESTs non-reacted EOS for 
LX-17.  However  due 
sensitivity  to  small  changes  in  the  non-reacted 
EOS  for  LX-17  it  was not  possible  to  match  the 
velocity  data  from  shots  PT3  PT5  PT6 and  PT7 
reasonably  well  simultaneously  using  a  single 
Simulations  of  the  Jack  Rabbit  experiments 
using  the  pressure-based  Ignition  and  Growth 
reactive  burn  model  have  previously  been 
reported.16  To  predict  the  persistent  dead-zones 
observed  in  the  series  of  shots  the  reaction  rate 
law  was  modified  to  include  a  time-dependent 
desensitization  term.  No  such  modifications  are 
needed  in  CREST  to  account  for  the  observed 
desensitization behaviour. 
The  conventional  explanation  of  shock 
desensitization is that the weak shock compresses 
out  potential  hot-spot  sites  e.g.  pores  such  that 
subsequent  stronger  shocksdetonation  waves  are 
then  travelling  into  material  deprived  of  reaction 
sites. An alternative point of view is that it is the 
lack  of  thermodynamic  stimulus  provided  by  the 
stronger  shocksdetonation  waves  that  gives  the 
explosive its reduction in sensitivity in a complex 
shock  process.28  This 
in  CREST  since  being  based  on 
entropy  a  much  smaller  reaction  rate  stimulus  is 
being provided to the explosive resulting from the 
subsequent  shocksdetonation  waves  than  would 
be  provided  if  a  pressure-based  model  was  used. 
This  allows  CREST  to  simulate  complex  shock 
and  detonation  phenomena  such  as  detonation 
extinction seen in Jack Rabbit without requiring a 
desensitization modification. A partner paper at 
this  symposium  in  which  CREST  is  applied  to 
PBX  9502  multiple  shock  configurations  also 
lends weight to this alternative viewpoint.29
latter  explanation 
Overall within a number of experimental and 
modeling uncertainties CREST is able to simulate 
the desensitization and corner turning phenomena 
observed  in  four  out  of  the  five  shots  in  the  Jack 
Rabbit  series.  The  experimental  measurements 
have been modeled without recourse to additional 
desensitization  criteria  which  are  needed  by 
reactive  burn  models 
explain the  experimental  observations. This  gives 
improved confidence in CRESTs ability to predict 
a wide range of explosive phenomena pertinent to 
TATB-based explosives. 
The  author  is  very  grateful  to  Mark  Hart  at 
LLNL  for  making  the  Jack  Rabbit  data  freely 
available for model validation. A rst-principles investigation of the equation of states and molecular weak spots
of -cyclotetramethylene tetranitramine HMX
Qing Peng and Suvranu De
Department of Mechanical Aerospace and Nuclear Engineering
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Troy NY 12180 U.S.A.
Abstract. We investigate the equation of states of the -polymorph of cyclotetramethylene
tetranitramine HMX energetic molecular crystal using DFT-D2 a rst-principles calculation based on density functional theory DFT with van der Waals vdW corrections.
The atomic structures and equation of states under hydrostatic compressions are studied
for pressures up to 100 GPa. We found that the N-N bonds along the minor axis of the
ring are more sensitive to the variation of pressure which indicates that they are potential
weak spots in atomic level within a single molecule of -HMX. Our study suggested that
the van der Waals interactions are critically important in modeling this molecular crystal.
Cyclotetramethylene-tetranitramine HMX is an
important secondary explosive that is most commonly used in polymer-bonded explosives PBX
and as a solid rocket propellant. The P 21c monoclinic -phase molecular crystal as shown in the
Fig. 1 a is thermodynamically most stable polymorph of HMX at room temperature and has highest density which is an important factor in detonation velocity. A molecule with a ring-chain structure in the -HMX crystal is shown in Fig. 1 b.
Due to its importance HMX is subjected to extensive studies both experimental 1 2 3 4 5 and theoretical 6 7 8 9. The anisotropic deformation in HMX molecular crystals determine how mechanical work is localized to form hot spots that promote rapid molecular decomposition which is necessary for detonation 10 11. These hot spots are
in general associated with the defects in the crystals including voids grain boundaries and dislo
cations. In general these defects could be used to
engineer the materials properties and performance
12 13 14 15 16 17. In atomistic models where there
are no defects the molecular crystals can sustain
high pressures. Here we dene the weak spots
as the region located at the weak bonds that are vulnerable to pressure or strains which however are
not well understood.
In addition density plays an important role in the
equation of state describing thermodynamic properties which can be used to describe materials at
continuum level. 9 Despite its importance the accurate prediction of the densities of energetic materials
is challenging. 18 19 Although rst-principles calculations based on density functional theory DFT
provide overall better predictive power than force
eld models 20 they fail in predicting densities of
energetic materials with standard approximations
partially due to their poor descriptions of dispersion
forces in molecular crystals. 21 22 7 4 23
There are extensive studies to improve the mod
1148
eling of dispersion interactions or van der Waals
vdW interactions 24. The DFT-D2 method 25 is a
revised version of DFT-D1 method 26 and has considerable improvement of its predecessor with negligible extra computing demands comparing to the
standard DFT calculations. Its application in studying the structural properties and equation of state of
-HMX under high pressure needs further investigation.
Here we model -HMX using DFT-D2 method
25 which describes the van der Waals interactions
as a simple pair-wise force eld. This method is
chosen as a result of compromise between two opposite considerations accuracy and feasibility. We
investigate equation of state of the -HMX and the
atomic structures under high pressures. We found
that the N-N bonds along the minor axis N2-N6
and N4-N8 bonds in Fig. 1 b are weakest bonds
thus atomic weak spots in -HMX molecules.
FIRST-PRINCIPLES MODELLING
We consider a conventional unit cell containing
two HMX molecules 56 atoms in total with periodic boundary conditions as depicted in Fig. 1.
The total energies of the system forces on each
atom stresses and stress-strain relationships of HMX under the desired deformation congurations
are characterized via rst-principles calculations
based on density-functional theory DFT. DFT calculations were carried out with the Vienna Ab-initio
Simulation Package VASP 27 28 29 30 which is
based on the Kohn-Sham Density Functional Theory KS-DFT 31 32 with the generalized gradient
approximations as parameterized by Perdew Burke
and Ernzerhof PBE for exchange-correlation functions 33 34. The electrons explicitly included in the
calculations are the 1s1 for hydrogen atoms. 2s22p4
electrons for carbon atoms 2s22p5 for nitrogen
atoms and 2s22p6 for oxygen atoms. The core electrons are replaced by the projector augmented wave
PAW and pseudo-potential approach35 36. The
kinetic-energy cutoff for the plane-wave basis was
selected to be 800 eV in this study. The calculations
are performed at zero temperature.
The criterion to stop the relaxation of the electronic degrees of freedom is set by total energy
change to be smaller than 0.000001 eV. The optimized atomic geometry was achieved through min
a Unit cell
Fig. 1 Geometry of -HMX a The unit cell of
-HMX containing two HMX molecules with ringchain structure. The four carbon atoms yellow and
four nitrogen atoms forms the ring-chain.
molecule with a ring-chain structure in the -HMX
crystal. The molecule is center-symmetric. The N1N3 and N2-N4 forms major and minor axis of the
ring-chain structure respectively. The four carbon
atoms are coplanar on the C4-plane. The four nitrogen atoms on the ring-chain are also coplanar on
the N4-plane. The angle between C4-plane and N4plane is 30.3.
imizing Hellmann-Feynman forces acting on each
atom until the maximum forces on the ions were
smaller than 0.001 eV. The atomic structures of
all the deformed and undeformed congurations
were obtained by fully relaxing a 168-atom-unit
cell. The simulation invokes periodic boundary conditions for the three directions. The irreducible Brillouin Zone was sampled with a 5  3  4 Gammacentered k-mesh. The initial charge densities were
taken as a superposition of atomic charge densities.
In the DFT-D2 method25 the van der Waals interactions are described using a pair-wise force eld.
Such a semi-empirical dispersion potential is then
added to the conventional Kohn-Sham DFT energy
as EDFTD2  EDFT  Edisp and
where N is the number of atoms. The summations
go over all atoms and all translations of the unit cell
L  l1 l2 l3. The prime indicates that for L  0
i 6 j. Cij6 stands for the dispersion coefcient
for the atom pair ij. rijL is the distance between
atom i in the reference cell L  0 and atom j in
the cell L. f r is a damping function whose role
is to scale the force eld such as to minimize contributions from interactions within typical bonding
distances r. Since the van der Waals interactions
decay quickly in the power of -6 the contributions
outside a certain suitably chosen cutoff radius are
negligible. The cutoff radius for pair interaction in
this study is set to 30.0 . Here Fermi-type damping
where S6 is the global scaling parameter. The global
scaling factor S6  0.75 is used for PBE exchangesR is xed at 1.00. The
correlation functions.
damping parameter d  20.0 is used.
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
Atomic structure and geometry
We rst optimize the geometry of the monoclinic
crystal also shown in Fig. 1 by full relaxation of
all the atoms and lattice constants. The optimized
lattice constants are a  6.542  b  10.842  c
 8.745    90 and  124.413. For the
comparison we also optimize the structure without
the van der Waals corrections. Our results of the
lattice constants the volume of the unit cell and the
densities are summarized in Table 1 and compared
to the experiment and previous theoretical results. It
shows that the standard DFT calculations give poor
predictions. For example the volume of the unit
cell is 6.7 higher than the experimental value. The
prediction of the density of -HMX from our DFTD2 calculations are more accurate with a difference
of -1.47 compared to the experimental value. This
is a signicant improvement over standard DFT calculations without van der Waals corrections.
In general the molecular dynamics MD simulations predict better lattice vectors than the standard
It is partially because the MD
calculations include the van der Waals interactions.
Once the van der Waals corrections are introduced
the rst-principles calculations 9 37 show good predictions with accuracy within 3 of the experimental values.
We study the isothermal equation of states of HMX at zero temperature under hydrostatic pressures. The corresponding volume is obtained after
the system is fully relaxed. The pressure-volume
curve of unreacted -HMX at the temperature of 0K
was illustrated in Fig. 2. The volume corresponds
to the 56-atom-unitcell volume. The isothermal hydrostatic equation of state of -HMX is compared
with experiments Gump 45 and Yoo 2 and previous calculations Conroy 7 and Landerville 9 . The
upper panel shows pressure from 0-100 GPa. The
corresponding volume in the present DFT-D2 calculations varies from 512.64 3 100 to 265.95 3
51.9. The lower panel shows pressure from 0-10
GPa for better comparison. Unlike standard DFT
calculation blue-circle line our DFT-D2 study
red-square line shows reasonably good agreement
with the hydrostatic-compression experiments 45 2
suggesting that the Van der Waals interaction is critically important in modeling the mechanical properties of this molecular crystal.
It is worthy pointing out that the experimental
data were collected at room temperature. Whereas
Table 1 Lattice constants a b c lattice angle  volume of the unit cell V  and density  predicted from DFT
and DFT-D2 calculations compared with experiments and previous calculations. The numbers in parentheses
are differences in percentage referring to the experimenta.
a Ref. 1 2 b Ref. 3 c 303K space group P 21n in Ref. 4 d space group P 21n in Ref. 5 e DFT study using

PAW-PBEGGA in Ref. 7 f 1 DFT study using USPP-LDA in Ref. 37 f 2 DFT study using
USPP-PBEGGA in Ref. 37 f 3 DFT-D2 study using USPP-PBEGGA in Ref. 37 g1 DFT study using
USPP-LDA in Ref. 38 g2 DFT study using USPP-PBEGGA in Ref. 38 h DFT study using USPP-LDA in
Ref. 39 i DFT study using USPP-PBEGGA in Ref. 40 j Monte Carlo calculations in Ref. 41 k Molecular
Dynamics study in Ref. 42 l Molecular Dynamics study in Ref. 43 m Molecular Dynamics study in Ref. 44
n1 DFT study using PAW-PBEGGA in Ref. 9 n2 DFT-D1 study using PAW-PBEGGA in Ref. 9 n3
DFT-D1 study using PAW-PBEGGA and zero-point energy corrections T300K in Ref. 9
our results are for zero temperature and we have
not corrected the results to account for nite temperature. Moreover our calculations are performed
using the  polymorph of HMX which is consistent with the experimental data of Gump and Peiris.
45 As observed in previous studies 6 46 the calculated isotherm appears to approach experimental
curve with increasing pressure. However as discussed below the sample from the experiment of
Yoo and Cynn 2 is no longer in the  phase for pressures beyond 12 GPa.
Hot spots within a molecule
We next study the evolution of the structures of
-HMX under high pressures. Firstly we studied
the lattice structures including lattice constants and
lattice angles. We observed that the lattice constant
b and lattice angle  are more sensitive to the applied pressures. We then examine the bond lengths
under various pressures in order to nd the atomistic mechanism corresponding to the variations of
pressure. The bond lengths of the bonds C-H C-N
N-O and N-N as a function of hydrostatic pressure
p ranged from 0-100 GPa are illustrated in Fig. 3. In
our unit cell the number of bonds is 16 16 16 and
8 for C-H C-N N-O and N-N respectively. The
bond lengths are averaged over the unit cell.
Our results show that the N-N bonds are the most
sensitive to the applied hydrostatic pressure which
indicates that they are potential atomistic weak
spots within a molecule because they are vulnerable to compression.
There are two kinds of N-N bonds in a HMX
molecule one along the major axis along N1-N3
of the ring-chain Fig. 1b and the other along the
minor axis along N2-N4 of the ring-chain Fig. 1b.
In order to nd the more accurate atomistic weak
spots within a single molecule we further examine the bending angles under various pressures. The
four carbon atoms are co-planar marked as C4plane. Due to the symmetry there are two angles
between the N-N bonds and the C4-plane. The angle along the major axis is denoted as 1 and the
angle along the minor axis is denoted as 2. During
the compression the two angles 1 and 2 might
respond differently causing the anisotropy of the
The 1 and 2 as a function of hydrostatic pres
Fig. 2 Equations of States The Pressure-volume
relationship of the solid -HMX at zero temperature. The volume is the 56-atom-unitcell volume.
The upper panel shows pressure from 0-100 GPa.
The corresponding volume in the present DFT-D2
calculations varies from 512.64 3 100 to 265.95
3 51.9. The lower panel shows pressure from
0-10 GPa for better comparison. The experiments
Gump 45 and Yoo 2 and previous calculations
Conroy 7 and Landerville 9.
Fig. 3 Bond lengths under high pressure The
bond lengths of the bonds C-H C-N N-O and N-N
as a function of hydrostatic pressure p ranged from
0-100 GPa. The bond lengths are averaged over the
sure p ranged from 0-100 GPa were plotted in
Fig. 4. We found that 1 increases with respect to
an increasing pressure opposite to the decrease of
2. Furthermore the angle 2 is more sensitive to
the applied pressure than the angle 1 indicating
that the N-N bonds along the minor axis are more
vulnerable to the compression. Therefore we may
conclude that the N-N bonds along the minor axis is
responsible for the sensitivity of -HMX.
We studied the molecular structural and equation
of states of the -HMX using the DFT-D2 calculations which is a rst-principles calculation based
on density functional theory DFT with van der
Waals corrections. The accuracy of the density is
signicantly improved from -6.2 to 1.5 using
van der Waals corrections compared to the standard
DFT calculations. The equation of states under hydrostatic compressions are studied for pressures up
to 100 GPa. The agreement of our predictions with
the experiments suggests that the van der Waals interactions are critically important in modeling the
mechanical properties of this molecular crystal. Our
analysis of the hydrostatic compression of -HMX
molecular structures reveals that the lattice constant
b are more sensitive to pressure. We then studied the
Fig. 4 Bending angles under high pressure The
angle between the N-N bond and the plane formed
by the four carbon atoms as a function of hydrostatic
pressure p ranged from 0-100 GPa.
the bond lengths of C-H C-N N-O and N-N bonds.
We found that the N-N bonds are vulnerable to the
pressure. We further studied the bending angle between N-N bonds with the plane formed by carbon
It turns out that the N-N bonds along the
minor axis of the ring are more susceptible to pressure. Thus the weak spots in atomic level are the
N-N bonds along the minor axis of the ring within a
single molecule of -HMX crystals.Ab initio calculation of the equation of state of monocrystalline TATB with a DFT-D
Nicolas Pineau1 Grgory Robert1 Nadia Dozova234 Grgory Geneste1 Marc Torrent1 Laurent Soulard1
2Ecole Normale Suprieure-PSL Research University Dpartement de Chimie F-75005 Paris France
3Sorbonne Universits UPMC Univ Paris 06 PASTEUR F-75005 Paris France
1CEA DAM DIF F-91297 Arpajon France
4CNRS UMR 8640 PASTEUR F-75005 Paris France
Abstract. We used the DFT-D approach based on the GGA functional PBE combined with
empirical dispersion corrections to build an ab initio equation of state for the inert TATB
monocrystal in the 0-1000K temperature and 0-40 GPa pressure ranges. This equation of
state was then used to calculate the hugoniot of TATB starting from ambient conditions
and compared to available experimental data. If the choice of the thermal model has a limited impact on shock pressures and velocities the shock temperatures are very sensitive.
This suggests the thermal model needs careful calibration on reliable temperature or energetic data. Such properties could be obtained through Path Integral Molecular Dynamics
The development of accurate equations of state
EOS for energetic materials is an important step
toward the multi-scale modelling of pyrotechnic devices which requires a good knowledge of the inert properties of the explosives shock pressures and
temperatures and their kinetics of chemical decomposition. However reports of the full construction of
an inert equation of states for detonics applications
remain scarce in the literature. The reason for such
a lack is probably the high computational cost associated with the large number of ab initio molecular dynamics AIMD simulations necessary to map
reasonably the relevant thermodynamic range and
the inherent limitations of Density Functional Theory DFT.
Consequently most atomistic studies are limited
to the cold 0K structural properties under ambient pressure and hydrostaticuniaxial compression
with the notable exception of the recent theoretical works of Landerville et al. on the introduction
of zero point energy ZPE and thermal corrections
in TATB 1 and of Mattsson et al. on the atomistic calculation of the Hugoniot curve of PETN
2. Among them a number of studies showed that
the LDA and GGA approximations fail to reproduce the equilibrium properties of solid explosive
systems under ambient conditions 3 4 5 6 this results from their purely local treatment of the electronic structure while the structure of molecular
crystals is mainly driven by the dispersion interactions which are poorly reproduced by DFT. This
limitation can be partially tackled by the addition
of an empirical dispersion correction i.e. through
the Grimme 7 or Neumann-Perrin 8 scheme. These
approaches provide a cheap and convenient way to
account for van der Waals interactions at play in
the intermolecular cohesion and improve substantially the predictions under ambient conditions 9 10.
However these were neither designed nor optimized
for highly compressed 3D-periodic systems therefore their reliability for shock-compression applications remains an open question.
In this paper we report the construction of an
equation of state for inert monocrystalline TATB
up to the current experimental estimations of
the Zeldovich-vonNeuman-Dring ZND pressure
spike between 33 and 43 GPa based on free surface or interface velocity measurements 11 12 13.
We used this EOS to calculate the Hugoniot of pristine and porous TATB and compare to the existing
data of the literature. We show that the choice of
the thermal model can lead to very different shock
temperature predictions.
Ab initio simulations
Computational details
We ran all the simulations with the ABINIT code
on the TEAR100 supercomputer of CEA in the
PAW formalism with the GGA functional PBE 14
and the empirical dispersion correction DFT-D proposed by Grimme 7. We used high planewave and
double-grid cutoffs 35 Ha and 50 Ha respectively. The structural optimizations were run with
a conjugate-gradient algorithm on a 224 k-point
grid to account for the structural anisotropy of the
unit cell shorter c cell parameter a stopping criterion of 5 105 Habohr was applied on the force.
The AIMD simulations were run on a 112 grid.
The PAW pseudo potentials were built with cutoffs
of 0.423  for hydrogen and 0.588  for CNO. We
checked the convergence of the forces and pressures
to 5 107 Habohr and 0.1 GPa respectively. We
also carefully checked for size effects using double
size simulation cells duplicated along the c-axis
we found that the calculated pressures differed by
only 0.1 GPa that is below the statistical uncertainty of our simulation averages.
Optimization and nite temperature procedure
After the full optimization of the TATB cell parameters and ionic positions the 0K cold curve was
obtained by progressively compressing the unit cell
along the c-axis that is the stacking direction of
the TATB sheets the resulting compression rates
x  V V0 span the 10.55 range by steps of 0.05.
At each step the volume was constrained and the
ionic positions and cell parameters were relaxed.
Each optimized conguration was then used for
nite temperature NVT simulations 300 K and
1000 K. We used the Verlet integration algorithm
with a time step of 5 a.u. 0.12 fs. The temperature was maintained by a Langevin thermostat with
a 104 a.u. friction constant 4.15 1012 s1. The
system was relaxed for one picosecond and the thermodynamic averages energy and pressure were
extracted for 2 to 3 ps.
Cold curve calculations
The full optimization of the unit cell leads to the
structure and cell parameters presented in Figure 1
and Table 1. These results compare reasonably well
with the previous theoretical works of Sorescu and
Rice 9 and Budzevich et al.
10 using comparable schemes the discrepancies in length and angle
parameters are comparable between the three studies although we note a somewhat larger equilibrium
volume in our case 436.5 3cell 2. Comparison to the existing experimental data at 300 K shows
that a and b are weakly but systematically overestimated 1 and c the most compressible direction
of TATB is underestimated by 1 to 3 depending
on the experimental reference the cell angles are
within experimental uncertainty.
In order to assess the accuracy of our minimization procedure we performed an additional structural optimization of the isolated TATB
molecule with similar computational parameters our estimate of the enthalpy of sublimation yields 33.4 kcalmol
in reasonable agreement with experiments 40.2 and 43.1 kcalmol
15 16 and calculations from empirical potentials
25.731.138.2 kcalmol 17 18 19.
the cell parameters under
compression is shown in Figure 2 and compares
well with the experimental data which suggests
DFT-D is well-behaved in this compression regime.
We stress that our samples remained chemically
inert during the full compression procedure.
Construction of the equation of state
The cold curve presented in the previous sec
tion is supplemented by a thermal component
where S is the entropy
i is a set of vibrational frequencies chosen
to mimic the internal degrees of freedom of the
TATB molecule. N is the number of atoms in the
unit cell 48 for TATB and  is the Grneisen
parameter set to a constant 0.5 value to match
the NVT simulations. Several options have been
tested for the thermal model rst we applied the
classical approximation one kBT per degree of
freedom then a single mode Einstein model with
i 725 K or 1100 K and nally we used a
multimode Einstein model using vibrational frequencies i calculated for the free TATB molecule
Gaussian03W hybrid functional MPW1PW91
22 23 6-311G2d2p basis set. The single
mode Einstein temperatures 725 K and 1100 K
were chosen to match the upper and lower limits
of the experimental estimations of the TATB heat
capacity 24. The resulting temperature dependences
of the constant volume heat capacity Cv shown in
Figure 3 display substantial differences among the
various models in the 0-1500 K temperature range.
Using a single mode is not sufcient to provide a
good t to the a priori more accurate multimode
approximation. However the latter in turn falls at
the bottom of the experimentally estimated range of
Fig. 1. View of the TATB triclinic unit cell. Light
green  carbon white  hydrogen red  oxygen
Fig. 2. Evolution of the TATB cell parameters
with compression. Comparison with the experimental data of Olinger and Cady empty squares and
Stevens et al. full circles.
The cold contribution of the equation of state is
obtained through a Vinet t we found values of
436.60 3cell 17.59 GPa and 7.60 for the equilibrium volume V0 bulk modulus K0 and bulk modulus derivative K cid2
0 respectively while the data of
Budzevich et al. yield 19.4 GPa and 7.4 for K0
0 with a Neumann and Perrin scheme. Our
0K optimized volume is close to the experimental 300 K measurements which underlines the fact
that although DFT-D accounts for most of the dispersion interaction the attractive contribution is not
yet sufcient. In a compressible material such as
TATB a reoptimization of the cold curve will be
necessary cf. next section.
Table 1. Unit cell parameters of crystalline TATB calculated with the DFT-D method this work and compared to recent theoretical Sorescu and Rice 9 Budzevich et al. 10 and experimental data Stevens et al. 20
Cady and Larson 21. The volumes depicted by  were calculated from the experimental density.
Fig. 3. Temperature dependence of the constant volume heat capacity using two single-mode and one
multimode Einstein models see text. Comparison
with the experimental data of Boddu et al. 24.
300K - full ab initio
Fig. 4. Impact of the zero point contribution to pressure on the cold curve and 300K isotherm.
Cv at 300 K. Note that the vibrational frequencies
depend on compression only not on temperature.
The high frequency modes associated with the
N-H stretching induce high zero point contributions
on energy and pressure. At x  0 the pressure
contribution yields 2 GPa for the multimode
Einstein model which results in an unrealistic
increase of the 300 K equilibrium volume due
to the high compressibility of TATB along the c
stacking direction Figure 4. In order to get workable EOSs we chose to re-optimize the cold curve
parameters after substracting the x-dependent
zero point pressure from the ab initio data set
which forces the total 0K  ZPE pressure to zero
at V436.6 3cell therefore each thermal model
comes with a distinct set of Vinet parameters for
which a few examples have been summarized in
The resulting 300 K isotherm is presented in
Fig. 5 and compared to the static compression experimental data available of Cady and Larson and
Stevens et al. The calculated EOS yields Vinet parameters K0 and K cid2
0 19.8 GPa and 7.1 to be compared to 17.2 GPa and 7.7 for Stevens et al. and
16.6 GPa and 5.9 for Olinger and Cady. The impact
of the thermal model on pressure is negligible.
We used these equations of state to compute
the shock properties of pristine and 4-porous
Table 2. Optimized Vinet parameters for the calculated 0K data with a zero-pressure constraint at
Fig. 5. Calculated 300 K isotherms compared to
the static compression experiments of Olinger and
Cady 25 and Stevens et al. 20.
TATB by solving the energy conservation relation
of Rankine-Hugoniot.
Porosity is included in
the calculation via a simple snowplough model.
The Hugoniot curves calculated with the diverse
thermal models are presented in gures 6-8.
For low compression rates the shock pressure
is rather insensitive to the thermal approximation
most of the pressure is provided by the congurational component and thermal uctuations induce
negligible variations. Some discrepancies appear
at larger compression   2700 kgm3 due to the
increasing contribution of the temperature through
shock heating 2 GPa at 3000 kgm3. On the
the quantum effects modify the shock
temperature substantially on the entire compression
range. The largest temperatures are found with
the multimode model 200 K with respect to the
725K-single mode -upper limit of the experimental
heat capacity- at 3000 kgm3 P  36 GPa this
is caused by a lower heat capacity in the multimode
case that is a lower ability of the TATB molecule
to store the shock energy in its internal modes see
It results in a larger ow of the shock
energy toward the kinetic component.
The porosity model induces a limited 5 increase in pressure 38 GPa vs.
3000 kgm3 and a large increase in temperature
300 K with respect to the monocrystal. We nd
our calculated shock pressure and detonation velocities in porous TATB agree reasonably well with
the available experimental data particularly in the
low pressure regime P  4 GPa D  4 kms. For
larger shock intensity the spread of the experimental data increases substantially and our calculated
values systematically match the lower bound of the
experimental fan. This result may be the consequence of at least partial chemical reactivity in the
experimental samples which is not included in our
model and may induce the acceleration of the shock
front and an increase in pressure and temperature.
Discussion and perspectives
The observed variability of
under shock compression stresses the need for
an accurate treatment of the thermal component
the heat capacity of large
Vanpoperynghe et al.
Particle velocity kms
Fig. 6. Hugoniot curves in the shock vs. particle
velocity plane calculated for monocrystalline TATB
1940 kgm3 and for porous TATB 1860 kgm3.
The data is compared to the experimental results of
Van Thiel 26 Marsh 27 Dick 28 Aveill 29 Van
Poperynghe 30 and Sollier 31 32. The GCLT data
red diamonds correspond to recent laser shock experiments on ultra-thin a few hundred m TATB
Vanpoperynghe et al.
Fig. 7. Same as Fig. 6 in the pressure vs. density
Fig. 8. Same as Fig. 6 in the temperature vs. density
Debye temperature systems such as TATB can be
dominated by the quantum effects over the whole
range of inert compression. High accuracy of the
calculated temperatures a few tens of Kelvins is
an important prerequisite for the treatment of the
chemical kinetics of energetic materials in a multiscale framework. For instance Wu et al. used DFT
calculations to show that the rate-limiting step of
TATB decomposition an intramolecular hydrogen
transfer has a 47.5 kcalmol energy barrier EA 33.
In an Arrhenius kinetic model where the reaction
rate scales as eEAkB T  the 200 K discrepancy
found at 3000 kgm3 1400 K-1600K results in
a factor 10 between the rate constants this factor
increases to 30 at 2700 kgm3 800 K-900 K.
Meanwhile further work appears necessary to
address the question of the zero point pressure
which amplitude degrades the agreement with experiments substantially a 2 GPa over-estimation
and requires an empirical ret of the cold contribution. Among the possible sources of error the
accuracy of the thermal model which relies on the
vibrational frequencies of an isolated molecule instead of the vibrational density of state VDOS of
the crystal was investigated using a crude VDOS
analysis of our AIMD simulations it suggests that
this approximation may account for a 0.8 GPa overestimation. The choice of the exchange-correlation
avour PBE may also have a substantial inuence
new calculations of the cold curve with a dispersioncorrected functional such as AM05 or ideally
with a non-local functional accounting intrinsically
for dispersion interactions may be a good alternative.
We built an inert equation of state for a TATB
using a rather simple procedure. First the 0K cold
curve was obtained from a full cell optimization
at increasing compression rates. Then different
thermal models were added following different
approximations single-mode Einstein models with
various Einstein temperatures and a multimode
model based on the vibrational spectra of the
isolated TATB molecule. We obtained the shock
properties of pristine and porous TATB by solving
the Rankine-Hugoniot relations. Although the
shock pressure is rather insensitive to the thermal
model we found large discrepancies in shock
temperatures which could have a substantial impact
on the description of the kinetics of decomposition
in a multiscale framework.
As far as we know this work constitutes the rst
attempt to build an EOS for a molecular crystal from
ambient to ZND spike conditions from ab initio
simulations only. The assessment of the resulting
equation of state is straightforward for pressure or
shock velocity properties static or dynamic compression experiments and suggests that further efforts are necessary in order to improve the description of the dispersion interactions at play in molecular crystals. However assessing the thermal properties is difcult from the experimental point of view
and requires simulations methods which address the
quantum nature of the ionic motion such as Path Integral Molecular Dynamics.Multi-shock and isentropic compression of the tri-amino-tri-nitro-benzene based
explosive PBX 9502 Evaluation of reactive ow models
Tariq D. Aslam Richard L. Gustavsen Nicholas J. Whitworth Heather J. Lacy Brian D. Lambourn
Caroline A. Handley Hugh R. James and Seth Root
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 USA
Sandia National Laboratory Albuquerque NM 87185 USA
AWE Aldermaston Reading RG7 4PR Berkshire UK
Abstract. We explore reactive ow models of the tri-amino-tri-nitro-benzene TATB
based explosive PBX 9502 95 TATB 5 Kel-F 800 as they pertain to both isentropic
compression experiments on the Sandia Z-machine and multi-shock compression experiments performed on the LANL 2-stage light gas gun. In both sets of experiments pressures
above 20 GPa show very little reaction whereas these pressures would normally induce a
rapid transition to detonation if reached within a single shock12. The phenomena of shock
desensitization3 or low entropy generated through multiple shocks4 can both explain this
observed phenomena although with different physical interpretations. We will specically
explore the reactive ow models CREST5 Wescott-Setwart-Davis WSD6 WSD with
desensitization7 and Ignition and Growth8. It will be shown that models with reaction rates
based mostly on local pressure predict detonation under many of these experimental conditions while models with reaction based on the entropy of the reactants or shock state have
higher delity to the experimental results. In addition to these multi-shock experiments
two nearly isentropic compression experiments have also been completed and those detailed results and comparisons with reactive ow models are also presented.
A relationship between the shock state pressure
and time-to-detonation is often observed in single
sustained shocks in high explosives. This phenomenon is often shown in a Pop Plot1. This type of
data is invaluable for calibrating reactive ow models. But this data alone can not constrain which
thermodynamic variables lead to reaction. For example pressure temperature or entropy can all be
used to calibrate a reactive ow model to Pop Plot
data. Multi-shock and isentropic compression ex
periments can be utilized to explore other thermodynamic portions of material response. Several experiments were designed to query the reactants equation of state EOS9.
In addition to the reactants
EOS these experiments are useful validation tools
for examining reactive ow models under abnormal
Two experimental techniques were conducted in
the present study. Multi-shock compression exper
1166
Fig. 1. Schematic of the gas gun shots with yer
iments on the LANL 2-stage light gas gun10 and
isentropic compression via the Sandia Z-machine11
were used to explore the response of PBX 9502.
The LANL 2-stage light gas gun is capable of
launching 50 mm diameter projectiles in excess of
3.5 mms. Multi-component impactors were constructed of either polymethylpentene TPX or KelF 81 polymer and backed by tantalum embedded
within a lexan sabot. See Figure 1 for schematic of
the multi-shock experiments. In each of these experiments PBX 9502 was rst shocked by the TPX
or Kel-F 81 polymer. This was followed by shock
reverberations due to the tantalum which serve to
increase the pressure further. Table 1 outlines the
various experimental congurations explored here.
In each experiment photon Doppler velocimetry
PDV was used to measure the resulting time dependent particle velocity as observed at the PBX
The Sandia Z-machine is a unique facility that
compresses a sample via a ramp wave to rather
high pressures through a magnetic drive of an aluminum plate. If the loading is slow enough or if
the sample is thin enough the resulting compression is nearly isentrtopic. In particular two experiments were completed at different drive conditions.
Each of these experiments had several samples of
PBX 9502 of varying thicknesses. At the back of
each of the samples of PBX 9502 was a LiF window where velocity interferometry system for any
Fig. 2. Schematic of the Z-machine compression
shots. Only two of the ve stations are shown in the
reector VISAR was used to measure the resulting
particle velocity at the PBX 9502-LiF interface. See
gure 2. In each case the effective magnetic pressure at the Al 6061gap interface was computed by
measuring an aluminum-LiF interface without any
PBX 9502. Under circumstances where the drive is
isentropic i.e. no shocks and the EOS of the aluminum and LiF are known then a backward integration technique can be utilized to determine the
time dependent drive pressure12. This same time
dependent pressure at the Al 6061gap interface can
then be assumed to drive the PBX 9502 samples
also. There are some caveats with this approach at
late times912. Tables 2 and 3 shows the various dimensions of the Z-machine compression shots. In
each case station 3 was used to compute the drive
and as such there was no PBX 9502 at this station.
Figures 3 and 4 show the computed drive pressures
at the Al 6061 free surface for these two experiments as computed from the backward analysis.
Both the multi-shock gas gun and Z-machine
compression experiments are intended to be one di
1167
Table 1. Gun Shot Congurations. uf is the yer speed.
Table 2. Z-1489 congurations with PBX 9502 initial density of 1.887 gcm3.
Fig. 3. Drive pressure for Z-1489 as determined
from backward analysis12.
Table 3. Z-1981 congurations with PBX 9502 initial density of 1.887 gcm3.
Fig. 4. Drive pressure for Z-1981 as determined
from backward analysis12.
mensional. As such modeling these multi-material
experiments can be accomplished efciently via one
dimensional Lagrangian codes1013. The inert EOS
parameters used with the CREST model are given
in table 4. The parameters used with all other reactive ow models were slightly different and given
in tables 5 and 6. Generally the slight differences in
the EOS parameters of 1 made relatively small
quantitative but not qualitative differences in the
computed results. All simulations were performed
at a Lagrangian spatial resolution of 10m. Qualitative difference employing ner resolutions was not
observed for the computations presented here.
The EOS and rate model parameters of the various reactive ow models are not detailed here but
can be found in the given references CREST5
WSD6 WSD with desensitization7 and Ignition and
Growth8. A qualitative overview of each of these
methods is given next.
The Ignition and Growth model does not have
any explicit desensitization built into the model although such modication have been incorporated
for the TATB based explosive LX-1714. No attempt
at recalibration using the augmented Ignition and
Growth model for PBX 9502 has been made and
is not explored here. For the standard Ignition and
Growth model once the explosive reaches a critical
density through shock or other means an ignition
reaction occurs usually leading to a few percent of
the total energy release. Once that ignition stage has
occurred the growth stage of the reaction proceeds
and is usually dependent on the local pressure raised
to a power. In the the PBX 9502 model8 this pressure dependence is quadratic although other powers
have been explored15.
The WSD model6 has a similar reaction form
as Ignition and Growth but smoothly switches between initiation and propagation parameters
based on the shock state of the material. Generally
for a pressure based rate law the initiation behavior
has a higher pressure exponent of 4.5 for PBX 9502
than the propagation sensitivity which is quadratic
In the standard WSD6
like Ignition and Growth.
there was no attempt to have shock desensitization
To incorporate shock desensitization the WSD
model was modied7 to include an additional rate
law that serves to remove hot spots under low
shock pressures under 6 GPa. Once the hot spots
are fully removed the main reaction rate is turned
off. This modied WSD model was able to reproduce some dead zones observed in proton radiography corner turning experiments7.
The CREST model5 does not use local pressure
in the rate law but rather the entropy of the solid
reactants. As such isentropic or multi-shock compression leads to a signicantly lower entropy than a
single shock at the same pressure. Thus the CREST
model will have a lower reaction rate when the explosive is isentropically or multi-shock compressed
than Ignition and Growth or WSD.
Multi-Shock Examples
The results of four multi-shock experiments are
presented here along with the model results. In each
experiment a lexan projectile had an embedded tantalum and polymer discs on the impact face. This
multi-component projectile causes multiple shock
waves to be transmitted into the PBX 9502 sample
This particular shot has the lowest initial and nal pressure of all the multi-shock experiments. At
a yer speed uf  of 2.139 mms the initial shock
into the PBX 9502 from the TPX impact is only
5.50.5 GPa the  is roughly the differences due
to the various EOS modeling pressure is not directly measured in these experiments. This is well
below any measured shock to detonation transition
in PBX 9502. Subsequent shocks between the tantalum and LiF reections bring the pressure to 291
GPa which is well in excess of the pressure required to initiate PBX 9502 in a single shock. No
detonation or signicant reaction is observed in the
experiment. See gure 5 for a comparison between
the various reactive ow models and experimental
results of the interface velocity ui between PBX
9502 and the LiF window. It is clear from the gure that the rst weak shock ui  0.5mms is
captured reasonably well by all the models. But
both WSD and Ignition and Growth predict a detonation shortly thereafter due to the secondary shock
from the tantalum. Even WSD with desensitization7
still transits to detonation albeit after a delay of
Table 4. EOS parameters for simulations with CREST using a Mie-Gruneisen EOS based off a Hugoniot of
the form us  c0  s1up  s2 up
2up where us is the shock speed up is the post-shock particle
 1. Y is the yield strength and G is the shear modulus.
Table 5. EOS parameters using a Mie-Gruneisen
EOS based off a Hugoniot of the form us  c0 
Table 6. EOS parameters using a Mie-Gruneisen
EOS based off an isentrope of the Keane form10 and
  00q. K0 is the isentropic bulk modulus
at zero pressure Kcid48
 are the derivatives of
the isentropic bulk modulus with respect to pressure
at zero and innite pressure respectively.
100 ns as compared to the standard WSD model6.
Only CREST does not predict signicant reaction in
this experiment. It should be noted that the SURF3
model like CREST does not produce signicant reaction due to the lead shock being relatively weak16.
As a separate computational test if the reaction is
turned off completely in the WSD and Ignition and
Growth model we see a solution that qualitatively
matches the experimental results. See gure 6.
Note also that improvements in the reactants EOS
can likely be made in all three models as the timings of the rst and subsequent shocks often differ
by up to 50 ns as compared with the experimental
This multi-shock compression experiment has a
similar conguration to 2s-450 but the projectile
velocity is increased to 2.585 mms. As such
the initial shock pressure into the PBX 9502 is increased to 7.20.5 GPa. At these pressures the
WSD model with desensitization is precisely the
same as standard WSD model since no desensitization occurs in the model for pressures exceeding 6
GPa. Not surprisingly both WSD and Ignition and
Growth show detonation upon the secondary shock
arrival from the tantalum. To make the comparisons
clearer only results from CREST are shown in gure 7. Again reasonable non-reactive behavior is
observed in the CREST model similar to what is
observed experimentally. Shock timing from the reactants EOS could possibly be improved but the
overall comparison is relatively good.
Fig. 5. Simulated reactive ow models and experimental interfacial velocities for 2s-450.
Fig. 6. WSD and Ignition and Growth inert simulated and experimental interfacial velocities for 2s450.
Fig. 7. CREST simulated reactive ow and experimental interfacial velocities for 2s-463.
This shot reduced the thicknesses of the TPX and
PBX 9502 to roughly half that of 2s-450 and 2s-463
while increasing the yer velocity to 3.064 mms.
At this impact speed pressures near 9 GPa are induced in the rst shock. Eventually at this pressure PBX 9502 would transit to detonation but this
would occur after 20 mm of run the sample is less
than 3 mm thick. As such no transition to detonation was observed in the experiment nor the CREST
simulation. See gure 8. Again WSD and Ignition
and Growth predict detonation from the secondary
Here we explore a different polymer impact material namely Kel-F 81. With a Kel-F 81 density
of 2.5x that of TPX the initial pressure at 2.399
mms causes an initial shock pressure of 9.70.5
GPa. This is similar to but slightly higher than 2s509. The beginnings of reaction are starting to become apparent in gure 9 as indicated by the slight
increase in particle velocity after the initial shock.
The CREST model does a very good job at predicting the overall behavior. As with 2s-509 and 2s-463
WSD and Ignition and Growth both predict detona
1171
00.511.522.51.41.61.822.22.4ExperimentCRESTWSDWSD - desensitizationIgnition and Growthui - mmst - s00.511.522.51.41.61.822.22.4ExperimentWSD - inertIgnition and Growth - inertui - mmst - s00.511.5211.522.5ExperimentCRESTui - mmst - sFig. 8. CREST simulated reactive ow and experimental interfacial velocities for 2s-509.
tion and those results are not shown here.
Here we explore the model predictions of reactive ow under isentropic or nearly isentropic
compression. Two experiments each with four
PBX 9502 samples of various thicknesses were
used to compress PBX 9502 to pressures above 20
GPa. The computed drive pressure on the aluminum
free surface is given in gures 3 and 4.
The rst Z-compression shot on PBX 9502
achieved pressures of 5 GPa. All the models explored here show no signicant reaction under these
conditions less than 0.01. See comparisons of
Ignition and Growth WSD and CREST in gures
10-12. In each gure 10-15 the left-most curve corresponds to the drive at the Al-LiF window which is
followed by progressively thicker PBX 9502 samples as one progresses further in time. At these
low pressures the reactants EOS is really being
tested and this experiment will be utilized in future
Fig. 9. CREST simulated reactive ow and experimental interfacial velocities for 2s-703.
Fig. 10. Ignition and Growth simulated and experimental interfacial velocities for Z-1489.
00.511.522.500.511.52ExperimentCRESTui - mmst - s00.511.5200.511.52ExperimentCRESTui - mmst - sFig. 11. WSD simulated and experimental interfacial velocities for Z-1489.
Fig. 13. Ignition and Growth simulated and experimental interfacial velocities for Z-1981.
The second Z-compression shot achieves significantly higher pressures above 20 GPa. At these
pressures both Ignition and Growth see gure 13
and WSD models see gure 14 have signicant reaction greater than 90 as can be seen by the increase in particle velocity well above what is seen
experimentally. Note that the desensitization version of WSD does not have enough time to affect
the reaction and yields precisely the same solution
as the original WSD model. The proles in gure 13 are reminiscent of Z-compression shots performed on the TATB based explosive LX-1717. The
CREST model see gure 15 shows very little reaction less than 0.01 as reaction is based on the
entropy which is nearly constant in these experiments. A small amount of entropy increase occurs
during the void collapse of the PBX 9502 and some
very weak shocks do form deeper into the explosive.
But overall the CREST model agrees reasonably
well with the experiment.
Several reactive ow models were evaluated with
respect to their ability to model multi-shock and
isentropic compression experiments. In all experiments presented here very little reaction appears
to occur. Models based on local pressure could not
Fig. 12. CREST simulated and experimental interfacial velocities for Z-1489.
reasonably predict this behavior correctly. Of the
models explored here CREST did the best job of
predicting the lack of reaction that occurred in these
Not only do these experiments provide a good
validation suite for off-nominal conditions but they
also can be used to test reactants EOS. In all models it appears improvements to the reactants EOS
can be made and is a direction of current research9.
Further studies5 of reactive ow with variations
in initial pressing density18 or initial temperature19
are other avenues by which to elucidate the thermodynamic variables important for reaction in plasticPhase Field Modeling of Deformation Twinning of -HMX 
Rahul and Suvranu De 
Department of Mechanical Aerospace and Nuclear Engineering 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Troy NY 12180 U.S.A. 
Abstract.  We  develop  a  thermodynamically  consistent  continuum  twinslip  phase  field 
model to study the deformation behavior of -HMX. The order parameter is associated 
with the twinning shear. Dislocations twins and phase transformations are distinguished 
and modeled within a crystal plasticity framework. The Landau potential is derived for 
the finite elastic deformation analysis. The equilibrium response of the externally stressed 
-HMX crystal is obtained by solving coupled continuum momentum equation and phase 
evolution  equation  using  Helmholtz  free  energy  functional  which  consists  of  elastic 
potential  energy  and  local  interfacial  energy  that  follows  from  the  CahnHilliard 
formalism. We study the twin nucleation and growth in a three-dimensional sample of HMX  molecular  single  crystal.  The  results  are  shown  to  compare  well  with  the 
experimental observations.  
molecular  crystals  determines  how  mechanical 
work  is  localized  to  form  hot  spots.  When  a 
crystalline  material  such  as  HMX  Octahydro1357-tetranitro-1357-tetrazocine  is  subjected 
to  finite  strain  there  are  two  major  deformation 
mechanisms  that  can  accommodate  the  strain 
Experimental  observation 
conventional  mechanisms  of  plastic  flow  i.e. 
dislocation slip are also operative in molecular HMX  single  crystal.1  Numerical  simulations  with 
an  isotropic  elastic-plastic  model  are  used  to 
account  for  such  deformations.2  However  since 
the  plastic  yielding  of  -HMX 
anisotropic  and  orientation  dependent  the  use  of 
inadequate. The anisotropic plastic response of HMX  molecular  crystals  is  studied  for  various 
phenomenological  model 
plasticity  based  constitutive  models.34  Crystal 
plasticity  model  has  been  used  elsewhere  to 
examine the collapse of pores and the influence of 
strain  localization  in  shock-loaded  -HMX  single 
plastic-deformation 
studied12345  modeling  of  deformation  twinning 
has  received  much  less  attention.  It  has  been 
reported  that  the  plastic  deformation  in  -HMX 
can be attributed to both mechanical twinning and 
slip.6  Therefore  a  crystal  level  twinslip  model 
must  be  developed  to  account  for  the  complex 
physics  encountered  in  the  nonlinear  deformation 
of  -HMX.  In  this  work  we  focus  on  modeling 
deformation twinning in -HMX to investigate its 
role in the sensitivity. 
twinning  on  101  plane  of  its  P21c  monoclinic 
crystal structure.7 Twinning allows low symmetry 
monoclinic  crystal  to  accommodate  large  strain. 
The deformation twinning in -HMX goes through 
several  stages89  elastic  twins  form  when  critical 
stress is reached which become thicker and more 
numerous with increasing load. On further loading 
twins become plastic and permanent twin from. 
 We  have  developed  a  thermodynamically 
consistent  continuum  twinslip  phase  field  model 
to study the deformation behavior of -HMX. The 
order  parameter  is  associated  with  the  twinning 
shear which is defined in terms of twin plane 101 
and  twin  shear  direction  101   of  -HMX. 
Dislocations  twins  and  phase  transformations  are 
distinguished  and  modeled  within  a  crystal 
plasticity  framework.  The  Landau  potential  is 
derived for the finite elastic deformation analysis. 
The equilibrium response of the externally stressed 
-HMX  crystal  is  obtained  by  solving  coupled 
continuum  momentum 
evolution  equation  using  Helmholtz  free  energy 
functional  which  consists  of  elastic  potential 
energy  and  local  interfacial  energy  that  follows 
from the CahnHilliard formalism.10 
In  subsequent  sections  we  first  derive  the 
twinslip  phase  field  model.  We  next  present  the 
numerical  examples  and  discussion  followed  by 
concluding remark.  
Phase Field Modeling 
In  a  phase  field  model  a  state  variable 
sometimes called an order parameter or a phase 
field variable is introduced to reflect a continuum 
measure  of  molecular  orderdisorder  of 
different phases. The present work deals with nonconserved  order  parameter  which  is  associated 
with  crystal  structure  e.g.  its  symmetry  andor 
lattice  orientation.  As  crystal  deforms  under 
loading it may shear to form twin. A normalized 
order parameter 01  is introduced to account 
for  twin  shear  where   0   corresponds  to  the 
parent  phase  1  to  the  twin  region  and 
 01   to  the  twin  boundary  interface.  For 
simplicity  we  do  not  consider  secondary  phase 
transformation and twinning in our model. 
We  adopt  a  multiplicative  decomposition  of 
the deformation gradient tensor F into plastic part 
F p  stress-free twinning shear  Ft  and elastic part 
F  FeFtF p det Fe  0 det F p 1 det Ft 1   1 
where  F p  describes local plastic deformation due 
to  plastic  slip  on  crystallographic  plane  while 
preserving  the  crystal  lattice  orientation.  The 
lattice deformation and local rigid body rotation is 
represented  by  Fe .  Twinning  is  modeled  via 
stress-free twinning shear. 
Associated  with  twinning  kinematics  is  the 
simple  shear11  which  is  related  to  the  order 
f 1 1 and vanishing derivative condition at end 
!f 0  !f 1  0   0  is the magnitude 
of twinning shear on the habit plane  m0  along the 
shear direction  s0  in the reference configuration of 
The  spatial  velocity  gradient  of  the  plastic 
shear flow is expressed as 
where  !  is the slip rate on slip system  in the 
parent region with slip direction  s0
  in the reference configuration  !!  is 
the slip rate on the slip system  in the reoriented 
twin fraction denoted by prime . 
The overall specific Helmholtz free energy of 
a crystal is assumed as 
where    is  the  temperature    denotes  the 
gradient  of  phase  parameter  and  qn   is  the  set  of 
internal  variables  which  evolve  with  plastic 
loading.  The  order  parameter    is  used  as  the 
criteria for phase initiation whereas   to model 
the phase evolution and growth. 
For  all  admissible  deformations  temperature 
and  phase  field  ClausiusDuhem 
imposes  the  following  restrictions  on  first  PiolaKirchhoff  stress  tensor  P  configurational  stress12 
We  require  the  phase  change  to  be  dissipative 
which leads to the phase field evolution equation 
where    P  Fes0  m0F p   is  resolve  shear  stress 
on  the  habit  plane  in  the  direction  of  twinning 
shear.  Given  a  functional  form  of    such  as 
quadratic  dependence  of    on    we  can 
time  dependent  Ginzburg-Landau 
equation and  1  is recognizable as a kinetic rate 
constant for the phase transformation. 
To  obtain  a  specific  form  of  the  constitutive 
descriptions  we  assume  that  the  Helmholtz  free 
energy  can  be  partitioned 
associated  with  elastic  potential  energy  3   and 
phase change e.g. phase transition energy density 
2   and  potential  energies  stored  at  the  phase 
boundaries  1   i.e.  1 2 3 .  The  local 
interfacial  energy  per  unit  reference  volume 
follows from the CahnHilliard formalism 10 
where  A  0   represents  the  potential  well  depth 
for  the  double  well  potential.  In  the  isotropic 
approximation driving force A and parameter  
are  related  to  equilibrium  energy  per  unit  area   
and  thickness  l  of  an  unstressed  interface  via 
The  effects  of  microstructural  evolution  is 
accounted using a thermomechanical based crystal 
plasticity model where the strain energy density is 
where  Ee  is the Green-Lagrange strain tensor and 
the forth order elasticity tensor is defined as  
A major part of a crystal plasticity problem is 
to  uniquely  determine  the  plastic  slip  rates   !i
that  satisfy  the  plastic  flow  condition 
on each slip system14 
where    is  the  resolved  shear  stress  and  y
the  slip  resistance  on  the    slip  plane.  The 
resolved shear stress on any slip system  may be 
The  constitutive  behavior  for  the  crystallographic 
slip  is  governed  by  a  plastic  flow  condition  Eq. 
11  together  with  an  evolution  equation  for  the 
.  The  slip  hardening  laws  have 
not  been  experimentally  well  investigated  for 
molecular crystals. Hence in the current work we 
assume  a  simple  hardening  model  proposed  by 
The governing set of equations to solve for the 
phase  change  model  without  chemical  reaction 
includes  the  well-known  conservation  of  mass 
momentum  and  energy  equations  of  continuum 
mechanics  coupled  with  equilibrium  phase 
evolution  Eq.  6.  This  is  a  set  of  coupled 
nonlinear  partial  differential  equations  that  is 
discretized  using  the  finite  element  method  and 
the  Newton-Raphson  numerical 
Results and Discussion 
We  study  twin  nucleation  and  growth  in  a 
5x5x3mm3  sample  of  -HMX  molecular  single 
crystal. The faces of the rectangular block initially 
normal  to  the  compressive  axis  remain  normal  to 
that axis. The sample domain is discretized using 
9375  tri-linear  hexahedral  finite  elements  with 
eight  Gauss  points  per  element.  The  material  and 
hardening  parameters  associated  with  the  single 
crystal  model  are  taken  from  literature.316  The 
twin  surface  energy  and  twin  boundary  thickness 
are considered as 45mJm2 and 1nm respectively. 
Twinning  in  -HMX  goes  through  several 
stages. Within the elastic limit elastic twins form 
when  the  critical  stress  is  reached.  As  the  load  is 
numerous  in  the  lattice.  In  Fig.  1  we  see  that 
loading single crystals on the 011 face results in 
the formation of twins but that on the 010 face 
does  not.  Further  as  load  increases  from  top  to 
bottom twin becomes more visible and thicker for 
loading on 011 face however twin bands are not 
visible  for  loading  on  the  010  face.  These 
observations  are  consistent  with  experiments.8  In 
order to understand the orientation dependence of 
twin band formation in Fig. 2a we plot resolved 
shear  stress  on  the  habit  plane  in  the  direction  of 
twinning  shear  101 .  We  see  that  loading  on 
010 face does not result in a resolved shear stress 
twin  direction  whereas 
corresponding  growth  of  twinning  shear  strain 
with increasing uniaxial compressive strain which 
results  in  increased  thickness  of  twin  band  upon 
loading on 011 face. We see that for the loading 
directions for which there is a resolved shear stress 
component along the twin direction material starts 
to  shear  and  absorb  the  strain  through  twinning 
allowing it to be less sensitive as less mechanical 
work  is  available  for  temperature  rise.  Hence 
twinning  should  be  associated  with  greater  shear 
relaxation and hence decreased sensitivity. 
011  does.  Fig.  2b 
Uniaxial compressive strain
Fig. 2. a Resolved shear stress on the habit plane 
101  in  the  direction  of  twinning  shear  and  b 
twinning shear for two orientations. 
development  of  plastic  or  permanent  twins  see 
Fig. 3. We next examine the deformation behavior 
in finite deformation regime using twin-slip phase 
field  model  developed  in  the  previous  section.  HMX is a low symmetry crystal and has only two 
possible  slip  systems  001100  and  101101  
one of which coincides with the twin system. 
Fig. 1. Twinning in -HMX upon loading on 011 
face  no  twinning  on  010.  We  compare  the 
distribution of twin shear contours with increasing 
load from top to bottom.  
Fig. 3. Plastic twinning in -HMX upon loading on 
In Fig. 4 we see that the plastic behavior of HMX 
is  highly  anisotropic.  The  010100 
orientation  exhibits  a  linear  elastic  stress-strain 
response while the 110001 orientation exhibits 
observations.6 Fig. 5 shows volumetric response of 
-HMX  single  crystal  loaded  on  110  face  and 
along  001  direction.  Notice  that  the  elastic 
orientation  010100  shows  relatively 
volume  reduction  than  that  of  the  elastic-plastic 
orientation  011100.  This  may  have  significant 
effect  on  the  activation  mechanism  of  -HMX 
since  plastic  slip  acts  as  a  shear  relaxation 
mechanism  and  hence  less  mechanical  work  is 
available for temperature rise leading to chemical 
reaction.  For  orientations  such  as  010100 
large shear stress arises from steric hindrance that 
may  provide  much  more  mechanical  work  to 
increase the temperature that is required to initiate 
chemical decomposition. Further in Fig. 6 we see 
that  for  011100  orientation  twinslip  plane 
101101  can accommodate large shear strain. 
In  our  investigation  of  twinslip  phase  field 
modeling  we  verify  that  the  twinslip  plane  can 
accommodate  large  shear  strain.  We  observe  that 
the  orientations  that  do  not  yield  resolved  shear 
stress  on  the  twinslip  plane  along  the  twinslip 
direction  are  predominantly  elastic.  For  elastic 
orientations  large  shear  stress  arises  from  steric 
that  may  provides  much  more 
mechanical  work  to  increase  the  temperature  and 
to  detonation.  The 
orientations  for  which  there  is  a  resolved  shear 
stress  along  the  twinslip  direction  and  if  it 
exceeds  the  critical  resolved  shear  stress  the 
material  starts  to  twinslip  and  absorb  strain 
through  plastic  deformation 
allowing it to be less sensitive as less mechanical 
work  is  available  for  temperature  rise.  Therefore 
both twinning and plastic slip should be associated 
with greater shear relaxation and hence decreased 
sensitivity.  We  may  conclude 
deformation  twinning  is  essential  to  accurately 
capture the volumetric response of -HMX which 
may have significant effect on the activation. We 
intend to extend the twinslip phase field model to 
account for thermomechanical response of shock
and 
energetic materials. 
Uniaxial compressive strain
Fig. 4. Compressive stress vs. uniaxial strain plot 
for 010100 and 011100 crystal orientations. 
0.002 0.004 0.006 0.008
Uniaxial compressive strain
Fig.  5.  Comparison  of  the  volumetric  response 
increasing  uniaxial  compressive 
0.002 0.004 0.006 0.008
Uniaxial compressive strain
Fig.  6.  Comparison  of 
increasing  uniaxial 
011100 crystal orientation. 
twinslip  shear  with 
9.  Cady  H.  H.  Growth  and  defects  of 
explosives  crystals  MRS  Proceedings  Vol. 
296 pp. 243-254 January 1992. 
10. Cahn  J.  and  Hilliard  J.  Free  energy  of  a 
nonuniform system. I. Interfacial free energy 
J. Chem. Phys. Vol. 28 pp. 258-267 1958. 
11. James  R.  Finite  deformation  by  mechanical 
twinning Arch. Ration. Mech. Anal. Vol. 77 
12. Gurtin  M.  E.  Generalized  Ginzburg-Landau 
and  Cahn-Hilliard  equations  based  on  a 
microforce  balance  Physica  D  Nonlinear 
Phenomena Vol. 92 pp. 178-192 1996. 
13. Wheeler  A.  A.  Cahn-Hoffman  x-vector  and 
its relation to diffuse interface models of phase 
transitions  J.  Stat.  Phys.  Vol.  95  pp.  12451280 1999. 
heterogeneous  materials  Elsevier  The 
15. Chang  Y.  W.  and  Asaro  R.  J.  An 
experimental  study  of  shear  localization  in 
Metall. Vol. 29 pp. 241-257 1981. 
16. Sewell  T.  D.  Menikoff  R.  Bedrov  D.  and 
Smith  G.  D.  A  molecular  dynamics 
simulation  study  of  elastic  properties  of 
HMX  J.  Chem.  Phys.  Vol.  119  pp.  74177426 2003. 
The  authors  gratefully  acknowledge 
support  of  this  work  through  Office  of  Naval 
Research  ONR  grants  N000140810462  and 
N000141210527 with Dr. Clifford Bedford as the 
cognizant Program Manager. Investigating Shock Initiation and Detonation in Powder HMX 
with Reactive Mesoscale Simulations 
H. Keo Springer K. S. Vandersall C. M. Tarver P. C. Souers 
Energetic Materials Center 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94550 
Abstract. We perform reactive mesoscale simulations to study the influence of material 
density chemical kinetics energetic grain shape and product equation-of-state on shock 
initiation  and  steady-state  detonation  in  powder  HMX.  Model  predictions  demonstrate 
good  agreement  with  in  situ  pressure  gauge  data  for  1.24  gcc  HMX0.65  HMX 
powder subjected to an input pressure of 1.3 GPa. Additional studies reveal that the run 
distance for shock initiation is most sensitive to slight variations in material density and 
chemical  kinetics.  Shock  sensitivity  also  increases  when  using  ellipsoidal  HMX  grains 
oriented parallel to the shock direction. Predicted detonation velocity Vdet increases with 
increasing HMX  similar  to  experimental  trends.  Better  agreement  is  demonstrated  with 
steady-state detonation data at lower densities HMX  0.35-0.4 where materials initiate 
more rapidly than at higher densities HMX  0.45. Discrepancies in Vdet predictions for 
HMX    0.45  are  attributed  to  insufficient  simulation  domain  lengths  which  prevent 
calculations  from  achieving  steady-state  conditions.  Mesoscale  modeling  studies  are 
important because they enable the development of advanced continuum-scale models that 
incorporate  basic  structure-property  information  and  hot  spot  mechanisms.  Also 
predictions of in situ pressure gauge response can be directly used to calibrate existing 
reactive flow models that are employed in system-scale hazard assessments. 
The  shock  sensitivity  of  explosives 
enhanced  in  low  density  powder  forms12  and  in 
damaged  states3  posing  an  increased  risk  in 
impact  hazard  scenarios.  Recent  experiments  on 
HMX  powder  demonstrated  nearly  an  order-ofmagnitude  lower  pressure  threshold  for  shock-todetonation transition run distance in comparison to 
fully  formulated  HMX-based  explosives2.  This 
enhanced  sensitivity  is  also  important  to  delayed 
XDT  X  for  unknown  Detonation  Transition 
modes where the initiation mechanism is believed 
to  be  compaction  of 
fragmented  energetic 
deflagration-to-detonation 
transition  where  a  delayed  shock  traverses  a 
porous  region  of  the  explosive  to  facilitate  final 
transition to detonation8. 
improve  our  understanding  of  shock 
initiation  and  detonation  response  in  low  density 
energetic  materials  we  perform  reactive  mesoscale  simulations  to  investigate  the  effects  of 
material  density  kinetics  and  energetic  grain 
shape. While previous computational studies have 
focused  on  inert  meso-scale  simulations  probing 
single  and  multiple  hot 
spots910111213  only  more  recently  have  studies 
using  multi-physics 
codes141516171819. Due to the inherent complexity 
of these multi-physics simulations and our goal of 
homogenizing  mesoscale  predictions  to  develop 
advanced  continuum-scale  models  we  make 
simplifying  assumptions  about  the  microstructure 
and chemical-mechanical-thermal material models 
possible.  Our  mesoscale  modeling 
predictions  are  compared  with  data  from  1D 
transient shock initiation experiments2 and steadystate detonation experiments20. These experiments 
provide  an  excellent  platform  for  benchmarking 
our  mesoscale  modeling  predictions  because  the 
entire  domain  can  be  simulated  while  resolving 
microstructural  details  using 
representation of HMX grains.  
We perform 2D axisymmetric reactive multiscale simulations using the multi-physics arbitrarycode  ALE3D21.  HMX 
lagrangian-eulerian 
parameters  are  shown  in  table  1  for  1.905  gcc. 
Due to a singularity in the Mie-Gruneisen EOS for 
our range of relative volumes we employ a seventerm  polynomial  approximation  for  the  unreacted 
EOS. The Gruneisen gamma B0 is modified to be 
consistent with the heat capacity and bulk modulus 
Table 1.  Unreacted EOS model parameters22. 
We employ a JWL model for the product EOS in 
our  study  with  parameters  shown  in  table  2  for 
1.905  gcc.  The  baseline  parameters  Data  are 
based on detonation data for HMX powder with a 
density-based  correction  to  obtain  parameters  at 
target  density  and  has  an  associated  detonation 
velocity of 9.14 kms18. A Cheetah-based product 
EOS Cheetah is also used in our studies and is 
table  2.  The  detonation  velocity 
associated with the Cheetah EOS is 9.19 kms. 
Table 2. JWL product EOS model parameters.  
An  Arrhenius  kinetic  model  was  used  for  the 
baseline  HMX  reactivity  with 
parameters23 A  e29.35 s-1 Eact  35.612 kcalmol. 
The  kinetic  model  in  this  study  includes  a 
temperature-dependent  prefactor  term  Tn  on  the 
standard Arrhenius form cid1846cid3041cid1827cid1857cid2879cid3006cid3276cid3278cid3295cid3019cid3021 where the 
exponent is either n  0 for baseline calculations 
or  n    0.1  upper  bound  value  for  sensitivity 
study.  Element-based  temperatures  were  used  in 
the  kinetic  models.  The  heat  capacity  in  these 
calculations was 2.12x10-5 MbarK. For the HMX 
strength  we  used  a  constant  yield  strength  and 
shear  modulus  of  1.8x10-3  and  7.0x10-2  Mbar 
respectively  based  on  lower  bound  values  in 
single crystal HMX experiments24. 
explosives.  Consistent  with 
Figure  1  shows  the  row  of  HMX  grain  unit 
cells used for studying shock initiation response in 
experiments  shock  loading  is  realized  with  the 
aluminum  flyer  impacting  the  aluminum  target 
plate.  The  in  situ  Manganin  pressure  gauges  are 
represented  by  bulk  Teflon  consistent  with 
continuum-scale25. Symmetry planes on the lateral 
surfaces  of  the  unit  cells  mimic  a  sample  with 
infinite  radial  extent.  The  baseline  HMX  grain 
radius  rHMX  is  2.5  m  for  our  shock  initiation 
simulations.  This  grain  size  was  based  on  the 
lower  end  of  the  Class  I  HMX  powder  size 
distribution  used  in  the  associated  experiments2. 
The simulation mesh size is 100 nm.  
initiation  modeling  at 
Steady-state  detonation 
employ a row of HMX grain unit cells but the in 
situ  Manganin  pressure  gauges  are  removed  and 
the  aluminum  plates  are  replaced  by  a  highpressure  boundary  condition  to  achieve  transition 
to  detonation.  Detonation  velocity  is  calculated 
using  the  difference  in  time-of-arrival  of  the 
pressure peaks at two fixed locations 1 mm apart 
in  the  rearmost  portion  of  the  4  mm  long 
simulation domain.  
A gamma law gas model was used for the air 
equation-of-state  with  a  gamma  value  of  1.4. 
Steinberg-Guinan  strength  and  Mie-Gruneisen 
equation-of-state  models  were  used  for  the  6061T6 aluminum alloy and Teflon properties26.  
Fig.  1.  Row  of  HMX  grain  unit  cell  geometry  used  in  shock  initiation  simulations.  Shock  loading  is 
realized with the aluminum flyer impacting the aluminum target plate. Steady-state detonation simulations 
also employ a unit cell representation but the pressure gauges are removed and the plates are replaced by a 
high-pressure boundary condition to achieve transition to detonation. Figure not shown to scale.  
Results  Discussion 
Shock Initiation Response of HMX Powder 
Figure  2  shows  the  in  situ  pressure  gauge 
measurements2  at  0  3  and 6  mm  positions  for  a 
1.24 gcc HMX0.65 HMX powder impacted by 
an aluminum flyer plate at 477 ms corresponding 
to a 1.3 GPa input pressure. Modeling predictions 
are  shown  for  the  baseline  case  of  HMX0.65 
rHMX2.5m spherical grains and n0. While the 
TOA  predictions  and  peak 
pressures slightly deviate from data for the 3 mm 
gauge these results are promising. Early predicted 
TOA at the 3 mm gauge may result from relatively 
fast chemical kinetics or an unreacted EOS that is 
Fig. 2. In situ pressure gauge measurements2 at 0 
3  and  6  mm  positions  three  black  curves  for 
1.24  gcc  HMX  powder  impacted  at  1.3  GPa. 
Modeling  predictions  are  shown  for  the  baseline 
case of HMX0.65 and n0 three cyan curves.  
Figure  3  shows  the  reaction  evolution  in  our 
detonation for the baseline case HMX0.65 n0 
rHMX2.5m spherical grains. In contrast to more 
conventional  shock  initiation  in  high  density 
heterogeneous  explosives  where  burning  initiates 
inner  hot  spots  from  pore  collapse  and 
progresses  outwards  our  simulations  suggest  a 
different  mode.  For  our  study  on  low  density 
powder explosives the product gases are observed 
to jet into the outer pore regions engulfing HMX 
grains  in  gas  and  burning  progresses  from  the 
outside in. From our calculations we estimate the 
distance  between  the  reaction  front  and  the  point 
of  nearly  complete  reaction  to  be  10  unit  cell 
Fig. 3. Reaction evolution in HMX grain unit cell 
calculations  in  baseline  case.  Pressure  Mbar  is 
shown  at  the  top  and  mass  fraction  reacted  is 
shown at the bottom. 
We conduct a perturbation study to probe the 
effects  of  slight  model  parameter  variations  from 
baseline values for a constant input pressure of 1.3 
GPa.  Figure  4  shows  the  in  situ  pressure  gauge 
predictions  for  increases  in  kinetics  and  porosity 
as  well  as  switching  to  a  Cheetah-based  product 
EOS. Shock sensitivity increases significantly with 
increased  kinetic  model  parameter  n0.1  from 
baseline  0.0  and  porosity    HMX0.60  from 
baseline 0.65 but using the Cheetah EOS had less 
impact.  For  increases  in  porosity  and  kinetics 
TOA predictions at the 3 mm and 6 mm gauges are 
much earlier than the experiments. Also the peak 
pressure  predictions  for  the  3  mm  gauge  is 
consistent  with  a  detonation  implying  a  run 
distance of less than 3 mm.  
Fig. 4. Model predictions of in situ pressure gauge 
response  for  increases  in  kinetics  n0.1  blue 
curves  and  porosity  HMX0.60  green  curves 
as  well  as  switching  to  a  Cheetah-based  product 
EOS  cyan  curves.  Experimental  results2  are 
shown for comparison black curves. 
We  conduct  an  additional  study  probing 
changes  to  the  HMX  grain  shape  for  a  constant 
volume  fraction  HMX0.65  and  input  pressure 
1.3  GPa.  Figure  5  shows  the  in  situ  pressure 
gauge predictions for ellipsoidal HMX grains with 
major  axis  oriented  parallel  prolate  spheroid  or 
cigars  and  perpendicular  oblate  spheroid  or 
discs  to  the  simulation  axis-of-symmetry.  The 
simulation  axis-of-symmetry  itself  is  parallel  to 
the shock direction. The ratio of the major axis to 
the  minor  axis  is  31  and  the  minor  axis  size  is 
the  baseline  spherical  grain  radius 
significantly  with  the  cigar  grains  but  decreased 
with  the  disc  grains.  For  the  cigar  grains  TOA 
prediction at the 3 mm gauge is much earlier than 
the experiments. Also peak pressure prediction for 
the  3  mm  gauge  is  consistent  with  a  detonation 
implying  a  run  distance  of  less  than  3  mm.  In 
contrast  the  reaction  in  the  disc  grains  is  not 
observed to transition to a detonation by 3 mm.  
Increases  in  shock  sensitivity  with  the  cigar 
grains is unexpected since recent calculations27 for 
that  peak  hotspot 
temperatures  are  higher  when  the  shock direction 
is  perpendicular  to  the  ellipse  major  axis  rather 
than parallel to it. However our study employs 2D 
axisymmetric calculations with repeating elliptical 
grains  1000s  of  grains  whereas 
calculations are for single isolated pores under 2D 
plane strain conditions. These different approaches 
must  be  reconciled  with  the  experiments  being 
Fig. 5. Model predictions of in situ pressure gauge 
response  for  ellipsoidal  HMX  grains  with  major 
axis  oriented  parallel  to  the  shock  direction 
cigars  cyan  curves  and  perpendicular  to  the 
Experimental  results2  are  shown  for  comparison 
Steady-State Detonation of HMX Powder 
It  is  important  for  these  mesoscale  modeling 
approaches to not only capture the shock initiation 
response  but  also  the  subsequent  steady-state 
detonation  phase  of 
low  density  materials. 
Detonation theory contends that the product EOS 
initial density and chemical energy released define 
the detonation velocity Vdet at the macroscale in 
explosives.  We  perform  simulations  studying  the 
influence of solid HMX fraction HMX on the Vdet 
for  two different  product  EOS.  Experimental  Vdet 
measurements  of  HMX  powder  over  a  range  of 
densities20  are  used 
to  benchmark  model 
Figure  6  shows  Vdet  predictions  in  HMX 
powder  as  a  function  of  HMX  for  the  baseline 
experimental-based  and  Cheetah-based  product 
EOS. For all cases Vdet predictions increase with 
increasing HMX similar to experimental data but 
there is a notable change in slope at HMX  0.450.55.  For HMX  0.5-0.65 Vdet predictions for the 
baseline  and  the  Cheetah-based  product  EOS  are 
consistently lower than data. This suggests that the 
detonation  may  not  have  reached  steady-state 
conditions  in  these  higher  HMX  simulations.  The 
relatively higher Vdet predictions for the Cheetahbased  product  EOS  are  expected  since 
associated CJ detonation velocity at crystal density 
is slightly higher than that for the experimentallybased product EOS.  
In contrast Vdet predictions are consistent with 
experimental  data  for  HMX    0.35-0.4.  Based  on 
earlier  results  in  this  study  we  expect  that  the 
shock  initiation  occurs  more  rapidly  at  lower 
densities culminating to a steady-state detonation 
in  the  simulation.  Overall  these  results  suggest 
that simulation domains must be sufficiently long 
to  ensure  steady-state  detonation  conditions  are 
achieved over the range of densities studied. 
Fig.  6.  Vdet  predictions  in  HMX  powder  as  a 
function of HMX for baseline experimentally-based 
product  EOS  red  boxes  and  Cheetah-based 
blue  diamonds.  Experimental 
measurements20  of  steady-state  detonation  on 
HMX  powder  is  shown  for  comparison  black 
boxes and fitted line. 
Preliminary  experimental  benchmarking  of 
Simulations capture detailed in situ pressure gauge 
response  during  shock  initiation  and  VdetHMX 
trends  during  detonation  for  low  density  material 
using  simplified  material  models  and  a  unit  cell 
row representation of HMX grains. Perturbation 
studies  demonstrate 
porosity  kinetics  and  cigar-shaped  grains  on 
shock sensitivity.  
Mesoscale  simulations  demonstrate  better 
agreement  with  steady-state  detonation  data  at 
lower densities HMX  0.35-0.4 where materials 
initiate  more  rapidly  than  at  higher  densities 
HMX    0.45.  These 
simulation  domains  must  be  sufficiently  long  to 
ensure  steady-state  detonation  conditions  are 
achieved over the range of densities studied.  
Further  experimental  validation  of  mesoscale 
modeling  approaches  is  necessary  before  we  can 
confidently  use  predictions.  In  the  near-term 
modeling  must  be  validated  to  shock  initiation 
experiments  over  a  wider  range  of  HMX  powder 
densities  and  input  shock  pressures  than  those 
considered  in  this  study.  These  studies  should 
investigate  the  effect  of  using  a  variable  HMX 
grain  size  distribution  different  unreacted  EOS 
and a temperature-dependent heat capacity. In the 
long-term  we  need  temporally-  and  spatiallyresolved  temperature  deformation  and  pressure 
data  for  single  and  multiple  pores  subjected  to  a 
range  of  shock  pressures  to  compare  to  closelycoupled 
heterogeneity  of  energetic  materials  the  relevant 
length-scales  of  hotspots  and  the  time-scales  of 
pore  collapse  this  is  most  certainly  a  daunting 
experimental challenge. 
There  are  several  near-term  benefits  to  these 
studies.  The  ability  to  predict  in  situ  pressure 
gauge  response  is  valuable  because  it  can  be 
directly used to parameterize existing reactive flow 
models  such  as  Ignition    Growth  IG28  in 
turn the IG model can be used for system-scale 
understanding  of  microstructure-shock  response 
including porosity and grain shape effects can be 
used to guide the design of new energetic material 
microstructures  and  novel  additive  manufacturing 
information  and  hot 
Our  longer-term  goal  is  to  use  mesoscale 
modeling  as  the  basis  for  developing  advanced 
continuum-scale  models  that  incorporate  basic 
mechanisms.  Since  future  model  parameters  will 
be  more  closely  coupled 
straightforward and less non-unique. Such models 
microstructure for specific applications in order to 
optimize  both  performance  and  safety.  Future 
models  will  also  enable  sensitivity  studies  to 
important  parameters  and 
propagate associated uncertainties based on smallscale 
quantification of margins and uncertainties. 
tailoring  of  explosive 
This work was performed under the auspices 
of  the  U.S.  DOE  by  LLNL  under  Contract  DEAC52-07NA27344.  This  research  was  supported 
by  the  Joint  DoD-DOE  Munitions  Technology 
Development  Program.  We  acknowledge 
support  of  Sorin  Bastea  with 
for  HMX  powder  detonation 
velocities. LLNL Technical Report LLNL-CONF- Corner Turning Modeling with a Temperature Dependent Reactive Flow Model 
Retired from RAFAEL ISRAEL 
Abstract. we use our temperature dependent reactive flow model to reproduce the results 
of  two  corner  turning  test  configurations  the  traditional  cylinder  on  cylinder  ConC 
configuration  and  the  so  called  Hockey  Puck  HP  configuration.  We  compare  our 
calculated  breakout  curves  with  literature  data  and  find  good  agreement.  Because  our 
reaction rate depends on reactant temperature we dont need a special desensitizing term 
to reproduce the dead zone as do some pressure dependent reactive flow models. We 
show how the dead zone is formed and that its final shape and size agree with indications 
in  the  literature.  For  the  ConC  configuration  we  also  conduct  a  parameter  study  to 
quantify the influence of each of the main test parameters on breakout results.  
The  phenomenon  of  corner  turning  has  been 
known  and  studied  for  more  than  fifty  years. 
Nevertheless  the  mechanism  of  corner  turning  is 
not fully understood and dead zones formed by a 
corner  turning  event  are  considered  hard  to 
reproduce  with  a  reactive  flow  model  1-13.  In 
most  modeling  works  they  compare  predicted 
breakout  curves  to  experimental  data  and  get 
reasonable  agreement  but  have  difficulty 
predicting  the  correct  shape  and  size  of  dead 
zones. In 7 and 8 they use a pressure dependent 
reactive flow model  and  are  unable  to  reproduce 
the  dead  zone.  As  a  remedy  they  add  a  special 
desensitizing term to the reaction rate equation to 
enable  the  formation  of  a  dead  zone.  In  this  way 
they are able to produce a dead zone but not of the 
right shape and size. Only recently 14 using the 
CREST  reactive  flow  model  with  the  reactant 
entropy  dependent  reaction  rate  has  a  British 
group been able to predict corner turning.   
reproduce  results  of  two  corner  turning  test 
configurations  cylinder  on  cylinder  ConC  and 
Hockey  Puck  HP.  See  reference  11  for 
drawings  of  these  two  test  configurations.  Our 
ConC modeling includes the following 
  We observe that the initial part of the corner 
turning  process  consists  of  lateral  buildup  to 
detonation of a highly curved shock. 
  We  show  that  buildup  to  detonation  of  a 
curved  shock  needs  a  correction  of  the 
reaction  rate  as  a  function  of  curvature 
compared to the reaction rate in planar flow. 
  We conduct a parameter study to evaluate the 
dependence  of  the  breakout  curve  on  the 
incoming shock configuration from the small 
  We show that were able to reproduce the dead 
zone  because  our  reaction  rate  is  reactant 
temperature  dependent  and  not  pressure 
Curvature Dependent Reaction Rate 
We  usually  calibrate  our 
parameters  from  sustained  planar  shock  initiation 
data. In the past when we used this calibration to 
model corner turning we found that we needed to 
temperatures  by  a  factor  of  about 
reproduce correctly breakout data.  
In  figure  1  we  show  reaction  fronts  every 
microsecond from a typical ConC calculation. We 
see  there  that  the  reaction  front  is  highly  curved 
accelerated towards detonation. Once detonation at 
the edge of the reaction front is achieved the edge 
stops turning and continues along a straight line. 
Fig.  1.  Reaction  fronts  every  microsecond  in  a 
typical ConC calculation. 
On  this  basis  and  after  trying  several  other 
approaches we conjecture that the reaction rate at 
the curved front near the edge of the front has to be 
enhanced  relative  to  a  plane  front  of  the  same 
reactant  temperature.  A  possible  measure  of  the 
extent  of  curved  flow  in  the  flowing  explosive  is 
its effective plastic strain and we choose to make 
use  of  this  measure  as  it  is  accessible  in  all 
hydrocodes. Clearly curved flow would affect the 
distances  between  hot  spots  but  it  is  difficult  to 
figure  out  what  is  the  net  result.  Also  the 
additional plastic work in curved flow would cause 
additional  heating  which  enhances  the  reaction 
rate. We use the corner turning run of figure 1 to 
calibrate  the  effect  of  the  excess  of  effective 
plastic  strain.  In  figure  2  we  show  the  effective 
plastic strain at three points along the axis where 
the flow is practically planar as a function of the 
reactive progress parameter W. 
Fig. 2. Effective plastic strain as a function of the 
reaction progress parameter on the axis. 
We see from figure 2 that the effective plastic 
strain  does  not  change  along  the  axis  and  we 
represent  it  by  the  average  straight  line  for  the 
section between W0.1 and W0.9 
In  corner  turning  runs  we  use  this  relation  as 
representing  the  effective  plastic  strain  in  plane 
geometry.  In  non  plane  geometries  we  then 
the  reaction  rate  relative 
where  AW  is  a  parameter  adjusted  in  such  a  way 
that  the  first  breakout  time  in  a  standard  corner 
calculated the ConC configuration used in 11. In 
this  configuration 
the  donor  cylinder  has  a 
diameter  of  12.7mm  and  the  acceptor  cylinder  a 
diameter  of  25.4mm.  In  figure  3  we  show  the 
experimental  breakout  curve 
calculated  curves  with  different  values  of  the 
coefficient  AW  and  using  our  standard  TDRR 
parameters. We see that the first breakout time is 
reproduced for AW16. The first breakout distance 
is however off by about 2mm. Also the shape of 
the  calculated  breakout  curve  is  more  symmetric 
that the experimental one. Nevertheless we regard 
experimental  scatter  of  corner  turning  test  results 
results  as  good  enough  because 
is  reproduced.  To 
is known to be high and sensitive to small changes 
in  test  configuration  and  in  explosive  sensitivity. 
To demonstrate this we show in figure 4 breakout 
curves  from  two  tests  with  a  PMMA  front  plate 
reported in 11. Nominally these are two identical 
tests  but  their  first  breakout  points  differ  by  0.2 
microseconds  and  3mm.  In  figure  3  we  use  the 
slower of these two curves. 
Fig.  3.  Calculated  breakout  curves  for  different 
values  of  the  parameter  AW  compared  with  data 
from 11 for an LX-17 acceptor. 
every microsecond. We see from figure 1 that 
  The reaction is fast in the axial direction but 
builds up at a low rate in the radial direction. 
  As  a  result  the  corner  part  of  the  front 
changes its direction of motion as it moves. 
  When  the  corner  part  of  the  front  reaches 
detonation it stops turning and from then on 
moves along a straight line. 
  As  a  result  the  dead  zone  is  not  circular.  Its 
boundary is curved for low cylindrical radius 
values and straight for high radius values. 
At  later  times  release  waves  arrive  from  the 
boundaries  pressure  and  temperature  in  the  dead 
zone  decrease  and 
extinguished. In figures 5 and 6 we show maps of 
pressure and reactant temperature respectively at 
a late time but before the arrival of release waves 
from the boundaries. 
Fig. 5. A map with lines of equal pressure from the 
calculation of figure 1 at the time of the last curve 
Fig.  6.  A  map  with  lines  of  equal  reactant 
temperature from the calculation of figure 1 at the 
time of the last curve there. 
From figure 5 we see that the pressure at the outer 
part of the dead zone is 8-10 GPa and more. This 
Fig.  4.  Breakout  curves  taken  from  two  identical 
ConC  corner  turning  tests  with  a  PMMA  front 
Cylinder on Cylinder Test Calculations 
In  figure  1  we  show  the  development  of  the 
corner turning event and the formation of the dead 
zone. The ConC configuration used in figure 1 and 
in the previous section is the one used in 12. The 
curves  in  figure  1  are  detonation  fronts  drawn 
figures 8 and 9 we show breakout curves and dead 
zone boundaries at 7 microseconds after initiation 
of  a  10mm  long  donor  cylinder  for  different 
donor cylinder diameters 10 12 14 and 16mm. 
means  that  using  a  pressure  dependent  reaction 
rate  would  accelerate  the  reaction  there  towards 
detonation  retonation.  In  contrast  we  see  from 
figure 6 that the reactant temperature is 500K and 
that  by  using  a  reactant 
temperature  dependent  reaction  rate  a  dead  zone 
would indeed be formed. 
Next  we  check  the  influence  of  three  of  the 
main  parameters  controlling  the  corner  turning 
process  and  the  breakout  curve.  In  figure  7  we 
show  the  effect  of  lowering  the  reaction  rate  for 
all  reactant  temperatures  by  10.  This  is  the 
normal range of sensitivity scatter. 
Fig. 7. Effect of lowering the reaction rate by 10. 
Fig. 9.  Reaction fronts  and dead  zone  boundaries 
at  7  microseconds  after 
the  donor  cylinder 
initiation for different donor cylinder diameters. 
We see from figures 8 and 9 that the influence of 
donor cylinder diameter is significant. Decreasing 
this diameter from 16mm to 10mm delays the first 
breakout time by 1.4 microseconds and decreases 
the  dead  zone  radius  by  9mm.  In  figure  10  we 
check  the  influence  of  the  material  of  the  front 
plate.  In  11  they  used  both  PMMA  and  steel 
front  plates.  They  found  that  steel  enhances  the 
corner turning process relative to PMMA and this 
is what we see in figure 10. The time difference is 
Fig.  8.  Breakout  curves  for  donor  cylinder 
diameters of 10 12 14 and 16mm. 
We  see  from  figure  7  that  lowering  the  reaction 
rate  by  10  causes  a  4mm  increase  in  breakout 
distance and a 430ns increase in breakout time. In 
Fig.  10.  Influence  of  the  front  plate  material 
turning.  We  conclude 
causing  the  edge  of  the  front  to  turn.  Using  our 
TDRR  model  as  calibrated  for  planar  shock 
initiation we find that reaction rate is too slow for 
initiation of a curved front reaction is faster than 
temperature.  We  propose  to  characterize  curved 
flow in terms of its effective plastic strain and we 
calibrate this dependence from the tests in 11. 
Hockey Puck Calculations 
This  configuration  of  corner  turning  studies 
has  recently  been  developed  and  is  described  in 
1213. It is in axial symmetry and the donor is a 
semi spherical LX-07 charge initiated at the center 
behind an air well. This causes breakout along two 
surfaces at 90 degrees to each other. In figure 11 
microsecond  apart  and  the  dead  zone  formed 
above the air well is clearly seen. In figures 12 and 
13  we  compare  the  computed  and  experimental 
breakout  curves  from  1213  along  the  axial  and 
radial boundaries. We see a good agreement along 
the radial boundary and a lesser agreement along 
the axial boundary. 
show  calculated  detonation 
Fig. 12. Breakout curve out of the radial boundary 
the  HP  configuration.  Calculated  versus 
Fig. 11. Reaction fronts every microsecond for the 
hockey  puck  configuration.  The  discontinuity  on 
the third front is an artifact of the non perfect mesh 
at this neighborhood.  
We  use  our  reactant  temperature  dependent 
reaction  rate  reactive  flow  model  TDRR  to 
model  corner  turning  of  an  insensitive  high 
explosive  in  two  configurations  the  traditional 
cylinder  on  cylinder  configuration  and 
recently  developed  hockey  puck  or  air  well 
configuration. First we observe that corner turning 
is  a  lateral  shock  initiation  process.  The  highly 
curved  front  at  the  edge  of  the  axially  moving 
front  moves  slowly  and  at  an  angle  thereby 
Fig. 13. Breakout curve out of the axial boundary 
the  HP  configuration.  Calculated  versus 
configurations  and  show  how  dead  zones  are 
formed  using  maps  of  detonation  fronts.  For  the 
ConC  configuration  we  also  show  maps  of 
pressure  contours  and 
contours.  From  these  it  becomes  clear  why  a 
pressure  dependent  reaction  rate  cannot  predict 
dead zone formation while a reactant temperature 
dependent reaction rate can. 
For  the  ConC  configuration  we  also  do  a 
parameter  study  and  show  among  other  things 
how  sensitive  the  results  of  a  corner  turning  test 
can be to variations in sensitivity of the explosive 
and to variations in geometry. 
We  calculate  breakout  curves  for  both  test 
experimental data. We find reasonable agreement 
especially in view of the sizable scatter expected in 
such experimental data. ALE3D Simulation of Incompressible Flow Heat Transfer and Chemical 
Decomposition of Comp B in Slow Cookoff Experiments  
Matthew A. McClelland Elizabeth A. Glascoe Albert L. Nichols III  
Samuel P. Schofield and Harry K. Springer 
Energetic Materials Center Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
Livermore CA  94551 
Abstract. An ALE3D thermal-fluids model was developed for Comp B 63 RDX 36 
TNT  1  wax  and  applied  to  a  ScaledThermal-Explosion-eXperiment  STEX  with 
slow heating.   Solubility and viscosity models were developed for a well-mixed RDXTNT  slurry.    Chemical  kinetics  parameters  for  a  one-step  Prout-Tompkins  model  were 
obtained using One-Dimensional-Time-to-Explosion ODTX measurements and a nonlinear  regression  routine.    In  the  application  of  the  thermal-fluids  model  the  strong 
convection  of  mass  momentum  and  energy  was  reduced  at  high  temperatures  and 
associated  low  slurry  viscosities  to  make  the  simulations  numerically  tractable.      The 
ODTX  thermal-fluids  simulations  show  that  in  the  fast  experiments  flow  reduces 
explosion  times  and  self-heated  liquid  rises  to  the  top  of  the  cavity  and  ignites.    The 
STEX model shows that flow leads to a small delay in the explosion time and ignition 
near the top of the vessel.  Model comparison with STEX thermocouple measurements 
suggests RDX settles in the slurry to form a solid-like material in the lower portion of the 
vessel and a more fluid material above. 
Slow cookoff is of interest in the areas of fire 
hazard  reduction  and  key  questions  concern 
explosion time and violence. 
point explosives such as Comp B TNT and PETN 
can  exhibit  behavior  significantly  different  than 
solid explosives due to the formation and flow of 
liquid-solid  and  all  liquid  phases.  This  flow  can 
transport  by  orders  of 
magnitude changing the ignition time and location 
along with the violence. 
In the early cookoff models for Comp B solid 
RDX  and  TNT  decompose  to  gaseous  products.   
Tarver and McGuire1 developed a 1D model with 
transport  and  multi-step  kinetics 
represent Comp B ODTX measurements see Fig. 
1.    This  model  was  refined  by  Zerkle2  to  give 
better agreement with experiment. 
Fig. 1. ODTX layout and boundary conditions. 
An  ALE3D  cookoff  model  was  used  to 
simulate  the  thermal  chemical  and  mechanical 
behavior  during  the  heating  and  explosive  phases 
of  a  Comp  B  STEX  experiment  TE-01234  see 
the  model  provided  a 
temperature  it  did  not  capture  some  of  the  fluidlike  behavior  seen  in  an  internal  thermocouple 
Fig. 2. STEX layout and boundary conditions. 
Here  we  model  the  buoyancy-driven  flow 
thermal  convection  and  species  transport  along 
with chemical decomposition in this same Comp B 
STEX test using capabilities recently added to the 
ALE3D  modeling  framework5.    The  effects  of 
flow  are  explored  and  results  for  explosion  time 
and  temperature  fields  are  compared  with  ODTX 
and STEX measurements. 
ALE3D  Thermal-Fluids Model 
An ALE3D thermal-fluids is being developed 
to model the flow thermal and species transport 
along  with  chemical  decomposition  in  cookoff.  
The model composition is taken to be 64 RDX 
36  TNT  with  the  wax  neglected.    In  this 
incompressible  flow  model  a  single  reactant 
decomposes into a product species with the same 
material  properties. 
  Gases  generated  by 
decomposition  and  evaporation  are  assumed  to 
move rapidly to the top of the HE vessels and not 
influence  the  flow  and  decomposition.      This 
relatively simple model allows the effects of flow 
mechanics to be more readily investigated. 
RDX Solubility in TNT 
  The solid-liquid phase behavior has a strong 
influence on the viscosity of the mixture. TNT has 
a  melting  point  TmpTNT  of  81C  and  forms  a 
slurry  with  RDX  particles  see  Fig.  3.    RDX 
dissolves in the liquid as the temperature increases 
towards the RDX melting point TmpRDX of 205C.  
measurements6  are  extrapolated  from  near  the 
eutectic point to the RDX melting point using the 
following expression for the liquidus RDX weight 
fraction liq see Fig. 3 and Table 1 
T  T-TmpTNTTmpRDX-TmpTNT 
Here it is assumed that no intermediate compounds 
are formed and that the mixture is at equilibrium.  
These  assumptions  are 
temperature and decomposition rate increase.  One 
important  consequence  of  Eq.  1  is  that  the  64 
wt RDX in the Comp B is completely dissolved 
in the liquid at a temperature of 185C. 
liq  a0  a1T  a2T2 a3T3 
in which ai are fit parameters and 
Fig. 3.  Model RDX-TNT phase diagram.  
Heat of Dissolution and Thermal Properties 
Differential  Scanning  Calorimetry 
curves  for  Comp  B  RDX  and  TNT  are  used  to 
help  assess  the  solubility  curve  Eq.  1  and 
estimate the heat of dissolution see Fig. 4.  The 
DSC  curves  give  the  heat  flow  resulting  from 
phase  change  and  decomposition  as  the  samples 
are  heated  at  10Cmin.    The  Comp  B  and  TNT 
peaks  at  81C  show  the  endothermic  heat  flows 
associated with the melting of TNT in the Comp B 
and  TNT  samples.    The  RDX  curve  shows  two 
peaks at 190 and 200C which are likely related to 
the cid2010cid2012  phase  transition  of  contaminant  HMX 
and the RDX melting.  
Table 1  Comp B material parameters 
The  Comp  B  shows  a  heat  of  dissolution  as 
the  temperature  increases  from  90  to  185C.    An 
estimate  for  the  heat  of  RDX  dissolution  was 
calculated as 67 Jg of Comp B 105 Jg of RDX 
dissolved based on the area under the curve.   For 
this  estimate  the  baseline  was  aligned  with  low 
temperature  measurements  between  45  and  60C  
and  included  a  heat  flow  area  between  90  and 
110C  consistent  with  the  above  solubility  data 
see Fig. 3.  The baseline was adjusted so that the 
integral of this heat flow relative to the total heat 
of  dissolution  matched  the  fraction  of  RDX 
Although replicate runs yielded heats within 1 
Jg the results are quite sensitive to the placement 
of the baseline and have uncertainties greater than 
10.    One  contribution  to  this  uncertainty  is  the 
overlap  between  the  dissolution  region  and  the 
exothermic  decomposition  region  at  temperatures 
above 185C.   Finally it is noted that this value of 
105 Jg of RDX dissolved is less than 161 Jg for 
the RDX heat of fusion1. 
A  model  heat  flow  curve  for  dissolution  of 
RDX in the Comp B sample was calculated based 
on  Eq.  1  a  constant  value  of  105  Jg  of  RDX 
dissolved  and  the  assumption  of  instantaneous 
equilibrium see Fig. 4.  The model and measured 
temperatures but diverge near the temperature of 
185C for complete dissolution. 
flow  are  similar  at 
Fig.  4.  DSC  heat  flows  for  Comp  B  RDX  and 
TNT at a ramp rate of 10 Cmin. 
Finally it is observed that the DSC curves for 
RDX and TNT cannot be combined simply to give 
the  Comp  B  curve.    The  RDX  in  Comp  B 
dissolves at temperatures below 185C rather than 
melting all at once at 205C see Fig. 4.  Also the 
Comp B decomposes in a single peak rather than 
in  two  separate  peaks  as  would  result  from  the 
simple combination of the RDX and TNT curves.  
Thus  separate  RDX  and  TNT  decomposition 
reaction sequences cannot be simply combined to 
give the Comp B behavior.  
For this initial thermal-fluids model the heat 
of solution 67 Jg a TNT heat of fusion of 94 Jg 
and the average sensible heat of 1.24 Jg-C were 
combined into a single average heat capacity see 
Table  1.    The  temperature  range  for  averaging 
conductivity was also assigned for this temperature 
  A  single  average 
Model density curves are shown in Fig. 5 for 
Comp B RDX and TNT.  Comp B is treated as an 
ideal  material  in  which  the  densities  are  simply 
combined  with  no  density  change  of  mixing.   
However  it  is  likely  that  the  TNT  liquid  with 
dissolved RDX would have a higher density than 
the  simple  combination  of  the  solid  RDX  and 
liquid TNT densities used in this study.   
In this thermal-fluids model we use a model 
with linear temperature dependence which is fit to 
the densities in the solid-liquid region between 81 
and  205C  see  Table  1.    We  employ  the 
temperature-dependent  density    is  used  in  the 
buoyancy driving force term but is constant at the 
20C value of 0 1.69 gcm3 in all other terms. 
compositions or with sedimentation models since 
it  is  only  a  function  of    and  has  no  explicit 
dependence on temperature. 
Fig. 5. Model density for Comp B RDX and TNT 
A viscosity curve for the slurry and all-liquid 
phase  was  developed  for  a  well-mixed  Comp  B 
slurry sample at the bulk composition see Fig. 6.  
Measurements at three temperatures were made by 
Nunez  et  al.7  between  85  and  135C.    The  oneparameter  Mooney  equation8  developed  for  a 
suspension  of  spheres  was  used  to  represent  the 
viscosity  of the slurry 
Fig. 6. Measured79 and model Comp B and TNT 
Chemical Decomposition 
The  decomposition  of 
represented by a single-step Prout-Tompkins PT 
Arrhenius expression10 
in  which    is the  solid volume  fraction  0  is  the 
value  at  maximum  packing  and  the  s  is  the 
temperature-dependent 
    is  calculated  as  a  function  of 
temperature  using  the  solubility  curve  Eq.  1 
and  the  density  curves  of  Fig.  5  at  the  bulk 
  The  solvent  viscosity  s  is 
estimated  from  viscosity  measurements  of  TNT9 
and the following expression 
The  parameter  0  was  adjusted  to  give  the  best 
resulting  slurry  viscosity  decreases  by  a  factor  of 
1000 from 81 to 185C.   Note that the viscosity 
3  can  be  applied  at  other 
the  measurements9. 
  mass fraction of reactant 
A0  frequency factor 
E  the activation energy 
R  universal gas constant 
T0  reference temperature 
n m q  kinetics parameters 
It is also convenient to define 
The  parameters  ER  A  and  p  were  adjusted 
with  mn1  to  fit  ODTX  measurements  as 
described  below.  The  parameter  p  generates  a 
characteristic  time  delay  for  the  reaction  of  the 
scale  pA0  for  mn1.    The  parameter  m  has  a 
strong  effect  on  reaction  progress  in  the  early 
stages  of  the  reaction  when  1  while  n  is 
important  for  progress  during  the  later  stages  of 
the reaction when 0.   
The measured ODTX explosion times  in this 
study  provide  data  for  the  end  time  of  thermal 
decomposition  but  no  information  related  to  the 
earlier progress of the reaction.  Consequently we 
set  mn1.    Finally  it  is  noted  that  most  ODTX 
reactions  do  not  progress  very  far  with  10 
before thermal runaway ignition and explosion. 
Species Diffusivity 
Although the reactant and product species are 
taken  to  have  identical  properties  the  mass 
diffusivity DAB is important for two reasons.  First 
the  inter-diffusion  of  the  reactant  and  product 
slows the reaction rate Eq. 5 which  can be seen 
when  it  is  written  in  an  autocatalytic  form.   
Second liquid diffusivities8 are of the scale 1x10-5 
cm2s and sufficiently small to generate numerical 
instabilities  for  the flows of this  study.   Here  the 
mass  diffusivity  is  set  at  constant  values  large 
enough to avoid these instabilities as is described 
in the next section see Table 2. 
Table 2  Characteristic quantities and dimensionless groups for ODTX and STEX simulations 
Numerical Strategies 
ALE3D511  was  used 
twodimensional  2D  axisymmetric  time-dependent 
incompressible  flow  2  thermal  and  species 
transport  equations  and  3  the  decomposition 
reaction  Eq.  5.  The  velocity  temperature  and 
species  profiles  were  represented  by  linear  finite 
integration  method 
employed  implicit  and  explicit  terms.    A  fast 
iterative  solver  GMRES  was  generally  used  to 
solve  the  matrix  but  a  full-matrix  decomposition 
was  performed  for  some  of  the  most  challenging 
high-temperature ODTX simulations. 
Since the time integration strategy included an 
explicit component a Courant condition was used 
to  limit  the  time-step  size  in  order  to  maintain 
stability and accuracy 
Here t is the time-step size x is a characteristic 
element dimension and vmax is the maximum flow 
speed.    The  Courant  number  Co  was  set  at  a 
Several  strategies  were  employed  to  handle 
the strong flows thermal and species convection 
combined with the multi-hour cookoff times in the 
STEX and longer ODTX experiments.  In order to 
keep computational times manageable in terms of 
the number of time steps viscosities at the higher 
temperatures were increased by 10X see Fig. 6 to 
reduce the flow velocity and increase the time-step 
size following Eq. 7. 
In order to maintain numerical stability for the 
thermal  convection  of 
explosive of this study a term with coefficient  
was  added  to  the  standard  conduction  term  to 
provide  additional  thermal  diffusion  in  the  flow 
direction where it is needed12 
qcid3404-kcid3397cid2961vvvT 8 
Here  q  is  the  heat  flow  vector  v  is  the  velocity 
vector v the magnitude and  is the unit tensor.  
The added thermal diffusion in the flow direction 
is  zero  for  a  liquid  at  rest  and  increases  linearly 
with  the  flow  velocity.    There  is  no  added 
diffusion in the direction normal to flow.  It can be 
the  Peclet  number  a  dimensionless 
measure of convection approaches a maximum of  
In  order  to  avoid  spurious  oscillations  in  a  1D 
steady-state  convective-diffusion  problem  with 
linear finite elements13  
model and numerical strategy see Fig. 1.  In Fig. 
7 the measured explosion times are plotted versus 
temperature for the Comp B sample of interest. 
Here  nx  is  the  number  of  zones  in  the  flow 
direction. Although this same algorithm will soon 
be  implemented  for  species  transport  the  mass 
diffusivity DAB was increased by trial and error to 
a level where numerical stability could be achieved 
Since  the  number  of  time  steps  ranged  from 
105 and 106 for the multi-hour ODTX and STEX 
respectively  meshes  were  kept 
relatively coarse.  For the 2D ODTX meshes had 
between 864 and 7776 elements while the STEX 
meshes had between 2640 and 5997 elements. 
Chemical Kinetics Parameters from ODTX 
First the chemical kinetics parameters in Eqs. 
5 and 6 were determined using the 1D thermochemical model with no species diffusion and the 
above  non-linear  regression  procedure. 
parameters  A0  ER  with  mn1  and  p6  were 
adjusted to give the parameters in Table 1 and the 
explosion times in Fig. 7.  The value for p was not 
allowed to go higher than 6 in an attempt to avoid 
possible  difficulties  with  numerical  noise  in  the 
second  bracketed  delay  term  of  Eq.  5.    This 
delay  term  is  very  small  at  the  beginning  of 
Chemical Kinetics Parameters by Regression 
determined by applying non-linear regression with 
the reaction Eq. 5 and the 1D heat conduction 
model  for  the  ODTX.    For  ODTX  modeling  the 
parameters  A0  ER  and  p  are  adjusted  with 
mn1.    The  value  for  the  reference  temperature 
T0205C was selected to be in the middle of the 
temperature  range  to  make  the  changes  in  the 
parameters A0 and ER as orthogonal as possible. 
The  nonlinear  regression  is  performed  using 
the Frontline Solver routine with a VBA function 
incorporating  an  efficient  solution  algorithm  for 
the  1D  thermo-chemical  model.    A  second-order 
finite  difference  method  was  employed  in  space 
and  a  Trapezoid  Rule  with  automatic  step-size 
control was used for the time integration.  Coarse 
20  zones  were  sufficient 
to  obtain  accurate 
explosion  times  in  the  simulation  of  multi-hour 
experiments whereas meshes with as many as 400 
zones were needed to resolve the behavior in thin 
boundary layers for short experiments of the scale 
ODTX Measurements and Model 
The  influence  of  flow  on  Comp  B  ODTX 
results  is  explored using  the  above  thermal-fluids 
Fig.  7.  Model  and  measured  ODTX  explosion 
The resulting 1D thermo-chemical model with 
no  diffusion  provides  a  fair  representation  but 
does  not  capture  the  curvature  of  the  explosion 
time measurements see Fig 7.   
The  effect  of  convective  flow  and  species 
diffusion  in  the  ODTX  system  is  evaluated  with 
the  2D  axi-symmetric  thermal-fluids  model.    As 
mentioned  above  the  high  temperature  liquid 
viscosities were increased by as much as 10X see 
Fig.  6  to  make  the  simulations  computationally 
tractable  by  reducing  the  flow  velocities  and 
number of time steps following the Co condition 
Eq.  7.      Thermal  diffusion  was  applied  in  the 
flow direction using Eq. 8 to maintain numerical 
convection.  The value of  in Table 2 was used to 
the  presence  of  strong 
keep the maximum Pe number below the value of 
400 based on Eq. 9.  For the species diffusivity a 
value  of  1x10-3  cm2s  was  selected  to  maintain 
numerical  stability  which  is  approximately  the 
same  as  the  thermal  diffusivity  of  8.2x10-4  cm2s 
calculated from properties given in Table 1. 
The  2D  thermal-fluids  explosion  times  are 
compared  at  five  temperatures  in  Fig.  7  with  the 
measurements  1D  results  with  no  diffusion  and 
2D results with diffusion and no flow.   
At  the  lower  temperatures  between  182  and 
205C  all  of  the  models  give  nearly  the  same 
explosion times. There is good agreement with the 
large  modelmeasurement  at  205C  but 
temperatures.  The similarity of the model results 
indicates that flow and species diffusion have little 
influence  on  the  explosion  time  at  the  lower 
temperatures.   For all of the models the Comp B 
approximately 300 s which is of the same scale as 
the thermal diffusion time  
t  R2  0.635 cm28.2x10-4 cm2s    492 s 
times  are  particularly  useful 
After this initial heating phase the Comp B stays 
at a uniform temperature for hundreds of seconds 
until  self-heating  occurs.    These  cases  with  long 
understanding chemical kinetics since the effect of 
transport  processes  is  relatively  small.    It  is  also 
noted  that  coarse  meshes  with  25  elements  in  a 
coordinate direction can be used since gradients in 
flow  temperature  and  concentration  fields  are 
small for much of the simulation.  
At the highest temperatures of 220 and 239C 
and the shortest explosion times the influence of 
flow and transport is strong.  Comparing the model 
explosion  times  for  the  no-flow  cases  with  2D 
and  without  diffusion  1D  shows  that  interdiffusion of the reactant and product increases the 
explosion times by more than 2X.  The addition of 
diffusion  gives  no-flow  explosion  times  higher 
than the experimental values.   
Comparing  the  2D  flow  and  no-flow  cases 
with  diffusion  shows  that  the  effect  of  flow  is  to 
reduce  the  explosion  times  by  2X  at  220  and 
239C.  Thermal  convection  of  the  Comp  B  near 
the boundary increases the rate at which the Comp 
B is heated leading to the smaller explosion times.   
These  results  are  in  approximate  agreement  with 
Buoyancy  effects  also  cause  the  self-heated 
liquid to rise and ignition to occur near the top of 
the  cavity  see  Fig.  8  in  contrast  to  the  no-flow 
case which ignites in a ring near the boundary.  
It  is  noted  that  in  order  to  resolve  the  strong 
gradients  in  thin  boundary  layers  we  used  the 
finest  meshes  with  grading  and  as  many  as  80 
elements  in  a  coordinate  direction.    A  50 
increase  to  this  number  of  elements  changed  the 
explosion  time  by  less  than  5  at  the  highest 
temperature of 239C. 
Fig. 8. ODTX temperature and velocity fields for 
flow and solid models with diffusion at 220C. 
For  the  wall  temperature  of  220C  the  flow 
intensity  and  strength  of  thermal  and  species 
convection is indicated with the calculation of the 
Reynolds  and  Peclet  numbers  shown  in  Table  2. 
Here  the  10X  viscosity  at  220C  was  employed 
see Fig. 6 along with the streamwise diffusivity 
at  the  characteristic  velocity  of  0.13  cms.    It  is 
seen  that  the  simulated  flow  is  laminar  with 
Re2.68  which  is  less  than  a  characteristic 
laminar-turbulent  transition  value  of  1000.    The 
thermal  and  species  convection  is  strong  with  Pe 
values 132 and 165 respectively.  The meshes are 
of the size needed to handle the flows since the Pe 
numbers  are  of  the  same  scale  as  the  number  of 
elements in a coordinate direction see Eq. 10. 
STEX Measurements and Model 
The  above  thermal-fluids  model  for  Comp  B 
was applied to a STEX test TE-0123 see Fig. 2.  
Three  pressed  cylinders  of  Comp  B  with  a 
combined mass of 646 g were placed in 4130 steel 
vessel with a diameter of 5.08 cm length of 20.32 
cm and wall thickness 0.406 cm.  Approximately 
10  ullage  at  room  temperature  was  included  to 
allow  thermal  expansion  without  pressure  burst 
prior  to  ignition.    The  2  kbar  confinement  was 
maintained  using  metal  O-rings  bolted  between 
flanges.    Three  radiant  heaters  spaced  at  120 
provided the energy to heat the sides of the while 
two  independent  resistance  heaters  were  used  to 
heat  the  top  and  bottom  flanges  of  the  assembly.  
fields  were  measured  and 
controlled  as  described  below  and  the  violence 
was  characterized  with  strain  gauge  and  radar 
The temperature was measured at five internal 
locations  using  a  probe  and  several  external 
locations  using  RTDs  see  Fig.  2. 
Proportional-Integral-Derivative  PID  controllers 
were  used  to  keep  thermocouples  at  top  Tsettop 
bottom Tsetbot and side Tset locations near their 
set-point  values.    In  this  test  the  final  ramp  rate 
was 1Ch in which Tsetbot and Tsettop  were kept  4 
and  9C  lower  than  Tset  in  an  attempt  keep  the 
ignition  point  near  the  center  of  the  vessel.    The 
top temperature was kept the coldest to counter the 
higher outside air temperatures near the top of the 
vessel resulting from free convection of air. 
 The 2D thermal-fluids model is applied with 
the  boundary  conditions  of  Fig.  2.    No  ullage  is 
included  in  this  incompressible  flow  model  since 
Comp  B  likely  expanded  to  fill  the  initial  gap  at 
the  measured  ignition  temperature  Tset160C 
based on the density changes shown in Fig. 5.  The 
thermal boundary model included the above three 
PID  temperature  controllers  along  with  air  heat 
transfer  coefficients14. 
coefficient  along  the  side  of  the  vessel  decreases 
with elevation to account for heating of the air as it 
rises.    In  order  to  save  computation  time  the 
model set-point point Tset was increased from 20 to 
150C  in  one  hour  in  contrast  to  the  1Ch  ramp 
from 130C used in the experiment see Fig. 2. 
Model  flow  and  temperature  fields  for  the 
STEX  experiment  show  the  effects  of  strong 
thermal convection and buoyancy during the ramp 
Tset155C and just before ignition Tset 168C 
see Fig. 9.  At Tset155C the large temperature 
gradients and flow velocities of the scale 0.2 cms 
indicated  strong  thermal  convection  as  the  warm 
liquid near Tset rises towards the top flange at the 
cooler  temperature  of  146C.    The  cooled  liquid 
sinks along the axis of symmetry.  Although all of 
the  Comp  B  is  molten  the  flow  is  considerably 
weaker  in  the  lower  half  of  the  vessel  since  cool 
liquid near the lower flange Tsetbot 151 C does 
Fig.  9.  STEX  temperature  and  velocity  fields  for 
flow and solid models. 
The  calculation  of  the    dimensionless  groups 
in Table 2 shows the flow intensity and strength of 
thermal  and  species  convection.    Here  the  10X 
viscosity  at  155C  was  employed  see  Fig.  6 
along with the streamwise diffusivity at 0.2 cms.  
It  is  seen  that  the  simulated  flow  is  laminar  with 
Re2.51  and  the  thermal  and  species  convection 
is  strong.    The  meshes  are  marginal  since  Pe  is 
larger  than  20  the  number  of  elements  in  a 
coordinate direction see Table 2 and Eq. 10. 
Near  ignition  liquid  is  heated    rapidly  by 
decomposition  and  rises  to  the  top  of  the  vessel 
where it ignites see Fig. 9.  In contrast results for 
a  2D  solid  model  show  self-heating  and  ignition 
near  the  center  of  the  vessel.    In  the  solid  model 
forces  cannot  drive  hot  material 
Temperatures  at  three  internal  TC  locations 
are  compared  in  Figs.  10  11  and  12  for  the 
experiment  the  solid  model  and  flow  model 
respectively.    The  internal  TC  measurements  at 
Tupr  Tmid  and  Tlwr  show  self-heating  as  the 
temperature  Tset  until  ignition  at  Tset160C.  
Measured  temperature  rises  at  the  center  location 
Tmid  are  the  largest  and  show  a  very  smooth 
increase  relative  to  Tset  over  the  last  10  h.  
Measurements at the lower location Tlwr also show 
a  smooth  rise  but  lag  due  to  initially  cooler 
temperatures.  Measurements at the upper location 
Tupr  are  similar  to  Tlwr  until  Tset152.5C.    Then 
Tupr  measurements  approach  and  follow  the  Tset 
ramp with fluctuations until a large increase about 
5 minutes before ignition.  Although both Tupr and 
Tmid are at similar temperatures of 208C just prior 
to ignition the rapid rise of Tupr suggests ignition 
near the top of the vessel. 
Fig.  10.  STEX  thermocouple  measurements  for 
It is seen that 2D solid model temperatures at 
the  Tmid  and  Tlwr  locations  exhibit  somewhat 
similar  behavior  to  the  measurements  see  Fig. 
11.    Although  the  solid-model  self-heating  and 
ignition occur later when the set-point Tset is 7C 
warmer at 167C the smooth temperature rises are 
observed  with  the  largest  increases  at  the  center.   
However near ignition the solid model upper Tupr 
also shows a smooth temperature increase relative 
to  Tset.    This  behavior  is  very  different  from  the 
Tupr  measurement  which  fluctuates  and  follows 
Tset  until  the  sharp  rise  in  the  last  5  min  before 
ignition.  These results suggest solid-like behavior 
in  the  middle  to  lower  regions  of  the  vessel  but 
flow  and  mixing  in  the  upper  portion  for  the 
A  1D  solid  model  without  diffusion  gives 
temperature  of  166C 
indicating that diffusion and axial heat flow in the 
2D solid model slow the rate of self-heating. 
temperatures Tupr Tmid and Tlwr are all 3C below 
Tset  until  one  hour  before  ignition  see  Fig.  12.  
During this final time period Tupr rises rapidly due 
to self-heating and ignition occurs near the top of 
the vessel see Fig. 9.  Although this flow model 
does not capture the solid-like thermal self-heating 
behavior  for  Tmid  and  Tlwr  the  flow  model  curve 
for Tupr shows the movement of the hottest liquid 
towards  the  top  of  the  vessel  similar  to  the 
Fig.  11.  Temperature  predictions  for  STEX  2D 
solid model with diffusion and 1D model without 
Fig.  12.  STEX  2D  flow  model 
One  possible  explanation 
behavior  in  the  middle  Tmid  to  lower  portions 
Tlwr  for the vessel and more fluid-like behavior 
in  the  upper  portion  Tupr  of  the  vessel  is  RDX 
particle  settling  during  the  thermal  ramp.      The 
settling  of  higher  density  RDX  particles  in  the 
liquid would increase the volume fraction of solid 
and  slurry  viscosity  see  Fig.  6  in  the  lower 
portion  of  the  vessel  and  leave  a  more  fluid 
mixture in the upper portion of the vessel. 
moves the ignition location toward the upper areas 
of  the  HE.    Finally  comparison  with  STEX 
thermocouple  measurements  suggests 
RDX settling forms a highly viscous region in the 
lower  portion  of  the  vessel  and  a  more  fluid The Modeling of Organic Explosive Initiation by a Short Laser Pulse and  
Alexander V. Khaneft Vadim A. Dolgachev and Georgiy A. Ivanov 
Department of Physics 
Kemerovo State University Krasnaya 6 Kemerovo Russia 
Laboratory of Heat and Mass Transfer Processes Simulation 
National Research Tomsk Polytechnic University 30 Lenin Avenue Tomsk Russia 
Abstract. In this study a numerical simulation of ignition of organic explosives PETN 
RDX  HMX  and  TATB  by  a  laser  and  an  electron  pulses  was  performed.  Criteria  of 
ignition  of  energetic  materials  by  pulsed  radiation  is  consistent  with  the  results  of 
numerical  calculations.  Determined  that  the  most  sensitive  to  the  effects  of  laser  and 
electron pulses is PETN and the most heat-resistant is TATB. Calculations of the critical 
energy density of ignition of PETN by a laser and an electron pulses are in a satisfactory 
agreement with the experiment. 
there  has  been  a  considerable 
the  number  of  papers  on  both 
experimental  studies  and  numerical  simulation  of 
the  conditions  of  initiation  of  explosives  by  laser 
or  electron  pulses.1-13  It  is  caused  both  by  the 
development  of  the  new  methods  of  initiation  of 
explosives  and  scientific  interest  in  defining  the 
initiation  mechanism  with  the  aim  of  directed 
control of the threshold energy of initiation. 
Organic explosives have high transparency at 
the  first  harmonic  wavelength  of  the  pulsed 
initiation  from  an  open  surface  by  the  high  light 
pulse in this spectral range.15 Usually a sample is 
covered with a transparent substrate to reduce the 
ignition threshold. The mechanism of reducing the 
ignition threshold energy by the substrate is treated 
differently  by  different  authors.  For  example 
threshold.  According 
the  gas-dynamic  unloading  of 
according  to  paper16  the  substrate  is  believed  to 
coefficient    of PETN crystals at the wavelength 
energy  of  the  laser  pulse  is 
heating of the explosive can be ignored. It means 
that  the  gas-dynamic  unloading  is  impossible. 
Paper18 experimentally proves that the ablation of 
the  substrate  and  the  optical  breakdown  on  the 
boundary  of  the  substrate  lead  to  reducing  the 
ignition  threshold  of  the  explosive  materials 
which  are  transparent  for  the  pulsed  neodymium 
The  majority  of  the  experiments  on  the 
initiation  of  organic  explosive  materials  are 
performed with PETN. The critical energy density 
W   which  leads  to  the 
of  an  electron  beam 
initiation of PETN in the area of the absorption of 
Jcm   at  the  average 
the  electron  beam  is    15 
  keV  and the delay 
energy of electrons 
  s .8  Delay  time  of  the  initiation  was 
determined  from  an  oscillogram  of  the  acoustic 
signal. The energy released in the area of electron 
beam absorption is not enough for the detonation 
of  the  rest  of  the  sample.  At  the  current  energy 
density the detonation of PETN takes place if there 
is  a  copper  plate  on  the  backside  of  the  sample. 
The  detonation  spreads 
explosive  -  metal  to  the  area  of  electron  beam 
In case of a free surface the detonation of the 
compressed tablets of PETN occurs by absorption 
of the electrons with the energy density 
Jcm   and  the  maximal  energy 
the  destruction  of  PETN 
monocrystals.9 It can be explained by the fact that 
the explosive can collapse before detonating if the 
occurrence  of  critically 
time  of  ignition  exceeds  the 
Nowadays  there  are  three  points  of  view  on 
the mechanism of PETN initiation by the electron 
beam  the  electric  discharge  model9  the  thermal 
model812 and the torch model11. Metal is known to 
attract electrons. Thus if PETN detonation can be 
caused by electric breakdown then the direction of 
its  propagation  contradicts  experimentally  shown 
direction  of  detonation  propagation  when  the 
copper plate is used. Paper12 examines the thermal 
model  of  PETN  initiation  which  has  a  system  of 
equations of coupled thermoelasticity as its basis. 
The research takes into account the dependence of 
chemical  reaction  energy  on  elastic  stress.  The 
calculation  results  qualitatively  correspond  to  the 
experimental  data8  on  the  delay  time  of  PETN 
initiation  by  the  electron  beam.  Papers13  analyze 
radiation-thermal  mechanism  of  PETN  initiation 
by an electron beam of nanosecond duration. The 
thermoelasticity  equations  completed  with  the 
introduction of the stage of autocatalysis allows to 
decrease the delay  time of PETN initiation in the 
The aim of the current paper is to simulate the 
ignition  of  organic  explosives  PETN  RDX 
HMX TATB by a laser beam in the transparency 
area in order to determine the ordinary dependence 
of  ignition  threshold.    Qualitative  description  of 
the  thermal  model  of  the  experimental  data  on 
PETN  initiation  by  the  electron  beam  without 
taking  into  account  thermoelastic  stresses  and 
autocatalisys  reaction.  In  addition  calculations 
which  predict  threshold  density  of  electron  beam 
energy  for  initiation  of  RDX  HMX  and  TATB 
were  performed.  To  simplify  calculations  the 
radiative heat exchange ablation and transition of 
the igniting to  the detonation  were  not  taken  into 
1. Simulation of organic explosive initiation by 
the short laser beam 
1.1. Formulation of the problem 
Heat  conduction  equation 
into  account  melting  and 
multiple light reflection from the opposite sides of 
the sample can be written in the following form  
Equation 1 has the following initial and boundary 
fH  is the latent heat of melting 
0R  and  L  are the radius and 
is the delta-function 
0T   is the  initial 
length of the  cylindrical  sample 
temperature     c   are 
thermal  conductivity 
coefficient and specific heat    is density  Q   Z  
E  are the heat effect of the reaction per mass unit 
of  the  material  the  frequency  factor  and  the 
activation energy of decomposition rate  R  is the 
0r   is  the  radius  of  the 
universal  gas  constant 
 is the energy flux density at the center 
the  surface  reflection 
coefficient  at  the  entrance  of  light  beam  to  the 
2R   is  the  reflection  coefficient  of  the 
back surface at the exit of the light beam from the 
beam is given by 20 
The  energy  flux  density  at  the  center  of  the 
where  m   is  the  duration  of  the  leading  edge  of 
the pulse related to the pulse duration determined 
1.2. The results of numerical calculations 
Preliminary  calculations  of  the  ignition  of 
explosive  materials  with  the  reaction  of  the  first 
order  by  laser  pulse  showed  that  the  degree  of 
. Therefore a reaction of a 
zero-order was used in the equation 1. 
The heat conductivity equation is numerically 
solved  using  an  implicit  difference  scheme.  The 
difference  equations  are  solved  by  the  sweep 
method  with  variable  size  of  coordinates  steps. 
Energy  conservation  law  is  observed  accurate 
within    3.2.  Numerical  calculations  were 
performed with kinetic and thermal parameters of 
explosives presented in Tab. 1. 
The  melting  heat  for    is  determined 
.    is estimated by averaging 
from  empirical  formula28 
 for PETN RDX and HMX.  
The  calculations  were  carried  out  for  the 
Fresnel reflection coefficient 
 is the refractive index of PETN17.  
The absorption coefficient in the calculations was 
cm . For this value of 
   the  calculation  results  are  in  good  agreement 
with  experimental  data  on  PETN  initiation  by  a 
laser pulse of nanosecond duration16. Furthermore 
cm  is quite reasonable and 
fit into the experimental interval.17  
Table 1. Kinetic and thermophysical parameters of 
the  numerical  solution  of 
the  heatconduction  equation  the  melting  of  EM  was 
considered as follows. Upon reaching the melting 
fT  in any elementary volume at a point with 
difference grid it was assumed that in this region 
the  temperature  stopped  to  change  and  melting 
began.  It  was  assumed  that  from  this  time  the 
melting process consumes the energy released due 
to the absorption of the light beam released in the 
exothermic  reaction  and 
transferred  by  heat 
t  is the time step. Once the energy stored 
in the elementary volume became equal to 
the temperature of the elementary volume began to 
change  again.  The  steps  along  the  coordinates  r  
and  z  were calculated according to the algorithm 
coefficient of a step increase. 
Fig. 1 shows the numerical results of the heat 
conductivity  solution.  As  it  is  presented  in  Fig.1 
the  critical  density  
mm  qualitatively  correlates  with  both 
experiment  and  the  critical  energy  of  ignition 
defined from the criterion29 
Expression 4 is obtained from the condition 
that  the  heat  release  rate  in  the  reaction  zone  is 
equal to the rate of heat removal from this region 
to the depth of the substance 
where  1r   and  1z   are  the  radius  and  thickness  of 
the  reaction  volume 
sample temperature at the boundary of the reaction 
the  chemical  reaction  rate 
decreases  by  a  factor  of  e .  Expression  5  is 
derived  from  the  law  of  conservation  of  the 
The relative error in defining threshold energy 
of  the  organic  explosive  initiation  by  the  laser 
pulse  from  equations  4  and  5  and  estimated 
from the solution of the heat conductivity equation 
is  5.5. Tab. 2 shows critical energy density of 
organic explosive initiation by the laser pulse. Tab. 
2 demonstrates that PETN is the most sensitive to 
initiation  by  the  laser  pulse  while  TATB  has 
highest thermal resistance. 
Table  2.  Critical  energy  density  of  organic 
explosive initiation by the laser pulse 
PETN  RDX  HMX  TATB 
Fig.  1.  The  dependence  of  PETN 
threshold  energy  on the  radius  of  the  light  beam 
line   numerical calculation  at 
  experiment15   calculation on criterion. 
Fig. 2 a b c and d presents the calculation 
results  of  the  radial  distribution  of  temperature 
T  at the origin of coordinates for PETN RDX 
These figures show that the ignition of organic 
explosives  starts  from  the  surface.  Thus  heat 
imbalance caused by Arrhenius nonlinearity leads 
to  the ignition  of  PETN  RDX  HMX  and  TATB 
from  the  surface  in  spite  of  almost  insignificant 
gradient of temperature along the axis  Z  caused 
by the small coefficient of the light absorption. 
Figure  3  shows  the  temperature  distribution 
along  the  beam  radius  on  the  surface  of  the 
  s . The critical energy density was 
Jm  and the radius of the 
  mm . Curve 1corresponds to 
the  sample  temperature  below  the  melting  point 
curve 4 corresponds to the time of explosion of the 
Fig. 3.Temperature distribution along the radius of 
Jm  at different times 
Fig. 4 shows the calculation results of critical 
E  for PETN equations 3 4 
depending on the reflection coefficient of the back 
of the  sample.  The calculations are  carried  out  at 
the  reflection  coefficient 
 curve 1 0.3 curve 2 and 0.6 curve 
3.  The  reflection  coefficient 
from  Fresnel  reflection  coefficient  
to the reflection coefficient of metal 
Fig. 4 illustrates that the higher the reflection 
1R  is the  wider the limits are  within 
which  the  energy  of  organic  explosive  initiation 
E  by the laser pulse can be varied by changing 
the reflection coefficient 
Fig  2.  Radial  distribution  of  temperature  T   on 
 is the adjustable coefficients  which 
are defined on the condition of the best description 
of  the experimental curve of  the absorbed  energy 
distribution.  The  function 
 and the integral is 
If  the  experimental  curve  of  the  absorbed 
energy  distribution  is  normalized  to  the  value  of 
  the  expression  6  can  be 
the  energy  absorbed  at 
According to the notations equation 7 goes as 
brackets in dimensionless coordinates 
For  PETN  the  electron  track  at  the  electron 
  m 1213. Radius of the electron beam 
We  analyze  the  thermal  model  of  explosive 
initiation by the nanosecond electron beam taking 
into  account  the  transformation  of  the  explosive 
due  to  the  first-order  reaction.  One-dimensional 
thermal conductivity equation taking melting into 
Fig. 4.  The dependence  of PETN  ignition critical 
energy  on  the  coefficient  of  reflection 
 1 0.3 2 and 0.6 3. 
  s   which  is  about 
In  experiments15  the ignition  delay  of PETN 
  s . The calculated 
by the laser pulse was 
ignition delay according to e.g. the data in Fig. 3 
magnitude larger than the experimental time of the 
start of expansion of the products. Our calculations 
show  that  for  an  ignition  delay  of  about 
s  the absorption coefficient of PETN is 
cm  . Perhaps in the experiments of 15 on PETN 
initiation the laser energy was slightly higher than 
the threshold value.  
2. Simulation of organic explosive initiation by 
the short electron beam  
2.1. Formulation of the problem 
Major energy loses at the beam deceleration in 
the solid  are  due  to  the  ionization.    The curve of 
energy  losses  in  the  solid  material  on  the  unit  of 
path is normalized to the energy losses on the unit 
of  path  with  the  energy 
experimental curve which reflects the distribution 
of  absorbed  energy  density  by  the  solid  material 
  is  often  approximated  by 
exR   is  the  extrapolated  path  length  of  the 
electrons  W is the energy density of the electron 
consideration  and  the  kinetic  equation  of  firstorder chemical reaction are set as  
with the following initial and boundary conditions 
efR   is  the  effective  path  length  of 
  is  the  energy  flux  density  of  the 
the  distribution  of 
absorbed  energy  density  of  the  electron  beam 
along the crystal  h  is the thickness of the sample 
 is the conversion level of the explosive.  
First-order reaction rate constant is determined 
where  Z   is  the  frequency  factor  E   is  the 
activation energy of chemical reaction rate.  
The dependence of electron beam intensity on 
 is current density of electron at the 
entrance  to  the  solid  material 
accelerating  voltage  of 
the  electron  beam 
generator where  m  is the duration of the leading 
edge  of  the  pulse  related  to  the  pulse  duration 
determined  at  the  half-height  by  the  equation 
The experimental curve of density distribution 
of  absorbed  energy  for  PETN8  is  satisfactorily 
described by equation1213 
  the  function  is 
It was assumed that the distribution of electron 
beam absorbed energy correlates with equation 8 
for RDX HMX and . The extrapolated path 
length  of  electrons  which 
  keV  for  RDX  HMX  and    is 
calculated by the empirical formula introduced in 
efA   is  effective  atomic  mass 
Here    is the density of the medium measured in 
2mc  is the rest energy of 
an electron equal to 511  keV  constants 
effective  atomic  number.  Effective  atomic  mass 
and  effective  atomic  number  are  determined  by 
iA  are atomic number and atomic mass 
 is its  weight fraction  n  is the 
number  of  weight  fractions.  The  estimation  of 
efR   for  PETN  using equation 12  at 
shows that calculated value is 14 less than 
obtained  from  the  experiment.  Thats  why  the 
efR  for simulation of  RDX 
calculated  values of 
HMX  and    initiation  by  the  electron  beam 
are increased by 14. 
2.2.  The  criterion  for  the  ignition  of  the 
explosives by the electron beam 
One-dimensional  criterion  for  ignition  of  the 
explosive  by  the  laser  beam  of  small  width  is 
obtained in paper.31 However if the path length of 
electrons in a solid material is comparable with the 
beam  radius  0r   criterion31  requires  radial  heatremoval  to  be  taken  into  account  as  it  is  done  in 
case  of  initiation  of  the  explosives  by  the  laser 
pulse  in  paper.32  In  addition  if  the  melting 
temperature is lower than the ignition temperature 
of explosives the heat of melting has to be taken 
into  account  in  critical  energy  density.  It  can  be  
shown  by  using  approach32 
Gaussian  energy  distribution  along  the  beam 
cross-section the current criterion is given by 
 is the critical temperature at 
the  maximum  of  electron  beam  absorption.  At 
  according  to  the  equation  13  a  twodimensional ignition problem  has to be solved. 
2.3. Calculation results and their discussion 
The  system  of  equations  8  9  with  initial 
numerically  using  an  implicit  difference  scheme. 
The  difference  heat  conductivity  equations  were 
solved  by  the  sweep  method.  The  calculations 
were carried out at the thickness of the explosive 
The  calculated  values  for  critical  density 
W  of explosive ignition electron beam at 
the  threshold  are  in  good  agreement  with  the 
criterion of ignition 13 14 at 
shows the critical energy densities of the explosive 
ignition by the electron pulse. 
Calculations shown that the most sensitive to 
the initiation by the electron pulse is PETN and the 
most  heat-resistant  is  .  Some  calculation 
results are presented in Fig. 5-Fig. 10. Fig. 5 and 
Fig. 7 show the calculation results of temperature 
distribution in PETN and TATB in the absorption 
area  of  the  electron  beam  with  pulse  duration 
occur on the curves 1  3 due to the melting of 
Table  3.  The  critical  energy  densities  of  the 
ignition of explosives by the electron pulse 
PETN  RDX  HMX  TATB 
Fig. 5. The dynamics of temperature distribution in 
the  area  of  electron  beam  absorption  at  PETN 
Fig. 6. The dependence of temperature on time at 
the  maximum  of  electron  beam  absorption  in 
 1 15.25 2 and 15.5 
Fig. 6 and 8 indicate the calculation results of 
temperature  dependence  on  time 
maximum  of  electron  beam  absorption  near  the 
initiation  threshold  in  PETN  and  .  The 
appearance of steps on these curves is caused by 
the melting of explosive. The calculation results of 
temperature  distribution  dynamics  for  HMX  and 
ignition  by  the  electron  beam  is  about  twice  as 
small as the energy density during the detonation9 
Fig. 10. Thus classical thermal explosion does 
not allow complete description of the experiments 
on PETN initiation by the electron beam.  
Fig.  9.  The  dependence  of  the  delay  time  of  the 
ignition of the explosives on the density energy of 
electron pulse lines - calculation 1  PETN 2  
HMX  3    RDX  4    TATB    experiment8 
Fig. 7. The dynamics of temperature distribution in 
the  area  of  electron  beam  absorption  at  TATB 
Fig. 8. The dependence of temperature change on 
time at the maximum of electron beam absorption 
Fig.  9  shows  the  calculation  results  of  delay 
time for PETN HMX RDX and TATB initiation 
by  the  pulsed  beam.  TATB  has the longest delay 
time  and  PETN  has  the  shortest  one.  The  delay 
time  of  the  ignition  was  calculated  numerically 
and  was  measured  from  the  beginning  of  the 
electron pulse. The calculated value of delay time 
 for PETN exceeds the experimental one by  5.2  
orders of magnitude. Partly it can be explained by 
the  fact  that  the  experiments  on  the  initiation  of 
explosives  by  electron  or  laser  pulses  are  usually 
carried out a bit higher than the ignition threshold. 
We  had  no  experimental  data  on 
electron  beam  energy 
leads to the detonation. Critical energy density of 
Fig.  10.  The  dependence  of 
initiation  on  the  initial  energy  of  electrons  in  the 
line    calculation  on  criterion     
experiment8      threshold  energy  of  PETN 
is  well  explained 
thermoelastic  stresses  which  are  known  to  affect 
activation  energy  of  chemical  reaction12  and 
radiation-thermal  mechanism  of  initiation13  are 
taken  into  account.  It  should  be  noted  that  the 
exothermic  reaction  makes  major  contribution  to 
the process of the ignition of the explosive by the 
nanosecond electron beam. 
We estimate the pressure of plasma formed in 
the area of energy release during the detonation of 
PETN using the equation given in paper33  
  is  the  ratio  of  heat  capacities  of 
the  solid  material  and  plasma  w   is  the  volume 
density of absorbed energy. The volume density of 
absorbed  energy  for  the  explosives  is  determined 
1z   is  the  width  of  the  reaction    zone 
  GPa . The obtained value of pressure in 
detonation  wave  for  PETN  is  quite  reasonable. 
According  to  paper34    if  detonation  is  caused  by 
  GPa . Maybe  if there is 
no  copper  plate  on  the  backside  of  the  sample 
PETN  doesnt  detonate  at 
the  gas-dynamic  relieving  of  the  sample  because 
in this case energy is released near the surface.  It 
is possible that if there is no copper plate on the 
backside of the sample PETN doesnt detonate at 
Jcm   due  to  the  gas-dynamic relieving 
of  the  sample  because  in  this  case  energy  is 
released near the surface.  Tomography of gas-dynamic characteristics of the detonation ow
Eduard R. Pruuel Konstantin A. Ten Vladimir M. Titov Alexey O. Kashkarov Lev A. Merzhievsky
Alexandr K. Muzyrya Ewgeny B. Smirnov and Kirill M. Prosvirnin
Russian Federal Nuclear Center All-Russian Research Institute of Technical Physics Snezhinsk Russia
Lavrentiev Institute of Hydrodynamics Novosibirsk Russia
Novosibirsk State University Novosibirsk Russia
      Abstract. Results of studying detonation processes in plastic-bonded TATB explosive 
which are obtained by methods based on using synchrotron radiation are given. In experiments the detonating cylindrical charge was probed in a plane perpendicular to the axis. 
This allows us to obtain data on the dynamics of the mass distribution on the beam in a 
xed section of the examined detonation ow. For cylindrical charges the ow of detonation products is axisymmetric. This allows us to reconstruct the density distribution along 
the radius in the examined charge section on the basis of information obtained by probing 
in one perspective only. Data on the density distribution in the detonation front and behind 
the front for several high explosives are presented. The data on density distribution were 
used  for  reconstruction  of  all  parameters  density  elds  particle  velocity  vector  and 
pressure of gas-dynamic ow of products of explosion. This method is based on numerical 
solution  of  the  gas-dynamic  problem  formulated  in  accordance  with  a  condition  of 
experiment. The form of the equation of state is set and a eld of ow is calculated in 
which the density distribution with that obtained in experiments is compared. The equation 
state parameters were chosen by minimizing the functional of root-mean-square deviations 
of the calculated and experimental x-ray shadows of the examined ow in selected nodes 
of  the  computational  domain.This  method  allowed  to  obtain  parameters  of  barotropic 
equation of state of detonation products and reconstruct agreed ow with full set of gasedynamic characteristics density elds particle velocity vector and pressure.
Aleshaev et al. 1 2 proposed a method for studying detonation and shock-wave processes with the
use of synchrotron radiation SR induced by operation of strong-current cyclic accelerators in the
regime of pulsed generation of such radiation. The
formation of a bunch of electrons on the orbit leads
to generation of x-ray quantum pulses following
each other with a stable time interval. A small duration of the pulse  1 nsec ensures high accuracy
of measuring the parameters of fast processes. During that time that passed after the papers were published specialists of the Novosibirsk Scientic Cen
1219
ter used the accelerators and other facilities of the
Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics of the Siberian
Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences BINP
SB RAS to perform a series of experiments in this
eld. Specialists from various institutes of Sarov
Snezhinsk Moscow and Chernogolovka participated in some experiments. The basic attention is
this paper is paid to using synchrotron radiation for
studying the processes of detonation of condensed
high explosives HEs including problems of density measurements in the detonation wave and in the
expanding explosion products.
General characteristics of the equipment
In all experiments described in this paper the
SR source is the storage ring of the VEPP-3 facility based at BINP SB RAS. Electrons collected into
one bunch with the energy of 2 GeV pass through a
deecting magnet wiggler with the magnetic eld
induction of 2 T and form an SR pulse with the photon energy of 1030 keV. The resultant soft x-ray radiation in this range allows effective conduction of
x-ray experiments with objects having the density
of 0.53 gcm2 . The x-ray component of SR offers
some advantages in the dynamic experiment over
the traditional sources of x-ray radiation high intensity of the photon ux 106 photonsmm2 during
one exposure low angular convergence and high
stability and periodicity of radiation ashes exposure time  1 nsec and repetition period from 125
The most important element of the measurement
system is the DIMEX linear detector of x-ray radiation 3 4 which was developed and fabricated at
BINP SB RAS. The detector allows the x-ray radiation ux density distribution to be recorded during
a time shorter than the interval between the pulses
and has 256 in the latest version 512 channels 0.1
mm wide. The electronic circuit of the detector allows 32 frames to be recorded. The DIMEX detector was used in all experiments described here.
Its spatial resolution is 0.1 mm at the 50 efciency of detection for quanta with the energy of
 30 keV. The detector aperture is 25.6 mm in
the latest version 51.2 mm in the direction of the
mea sured coordinate and 2 mm in the transverse
direction. The developed version is an ionization
chamber with a gas electron amplier separating the
region of conversion of x-ray quanta from the gap
where the charge is directed onto a scanning microband structure made with a step of 0.1 mm. The
coordinate distribution of in tensity is determined
from the magnitude of the charge passing through
each element of the scanning structure during the
If the ionization chamber is lled
by a XeCO2 mixture 8020 up to a pressure of
7 atm the device ensures a resolution of 0.2 mm and
detection efciency of 50. To reduce the overall
large radiation load a mechanical fast shutter rotating copper disk with a notch is placed ahead of
the detector to ensure the time of detector exposure
in the experiment for 40 mks only.
Tomography of gas-dynamic characteristics of
In experiments of this cycle
charge was probed in a plane perpendicular to the
axis Fig. 1. This arrangement allowed us to obtain
data on the dynamics of the mass distribution on the
beam in a xed section of the examined detonation
ow. An example of such a distribution is shown
in Fig. 2. Actually to obtain a tomographic image
of an object the latter should be photographed from
different perspectives. For cylindrical charges the
ow of detonation products is axisymmetric. This
fact allows us to reconstruct the density distribution along the radius in the examined charge section
on the basis of information obtained by probing in
one perspective only. Further with the ow being
assumed to be steady we reconstruct the complete
density distribution of detonation products i.e. we
construct the function r z where r and z are
the radial and axial coordinates. It is necessary to
solve illposed inverse dynamic problem of tomography and the classical methods based on Abels inversion cannot be used here. The reason is the nonsmoothness of data obtained in experiments and the
problem of their regularization. One possible solution of this problem is to develop special methods
of density reconstruction based on regularization
of the sought density distribution with intense involvement of a priori information on the examined
In our case we developed a special method of reconstructing gas-dynamic parameters of the detonation ow from the data of x-ray
experiments. The method is rigorously tuned to a
Fig. 1. Arrangement of the experiment on determining the density distribution in the detonation ow.
Fig. 2. Dynamics of the x-ray shadow in a xed section during plastic-bonded TATB charge detonation.
particular problem but it ensures not only signicant improvement of the density reconstruction accuracy 5 6 but also determination of the remaining
gas-dynamic characteristics distributions of particle velocity and pressure 7. The developed and implemented algorithm is described below.
Algorithm of reconstruction of ow parameters
and results obtained
The method of reconstructing the elds of gasdynamic characteristics of the detonation ow is based
on the numerical solution of the gas-dynamic problem formulated in accordance with a particular experiment. Let us consider a problem of a cylindrically symmetric gas ow. In this case the equations
of continuity and motion in the Eulerian coordinates
where  is the density p is the pressure u and v
are the axial and radial components of the velocity vector cid126v r and z are the radial and axial coordinates in space and t is the time. Passing to the
Lagrangian coordinate system we solve the problem of the gas ow having the equation of state
p  p000G p0  00  and G are parameters that have yet to be determined. With specied
values of parameters we calculate the ow eld in
which the density distribution can be compared with
that obtained in experiments.
The calculation was performed in a domain with
a plane right boundary which is consistent with the
assumption on a plane detonation wave propagating over the charge with a constant velocity D. The
problem formulation is illustrated in Fig. 3. The
boundary condition on the input boundary was the
inow of the mass and momentum uxes 0D and
0D2 respectively the boundary conditions on the
other boundaries were determined by solving the
Riemann problem on the interface between the detonation products and air. Using the Lagrangian coordinates we were able to identify the detonation
discontinuity naturally and to perform calculations
only in the domain occupied by the detonation ow.
Godunovs method was used for the numerical solution with varied values of the sought parameters.
The parameters to be determined were chosen by
minimizing the functional of root-mean-square deviations of the calculated and experimental x-ray
shadows of the examined ow in selected nodes
of the computational domain. The dependence
G was approximated by a cubic spline. The resultant problem of multidimensional minimization
was solved by the simplex method described and
The results obtained for a plastic-bonded TATB
charge 20 mm in diameter are shown in Fig. 4
5. Figure 6 shows the calculated unloading adiabat
tmksrcmlgcm2-2-101-3-2-1012012345Fig. 3. Formulation of the gas-dynamic problem for
calculating the detonation ow
shows the initial boundaries of the charge the arrow
indicates the location of the examined section.
parameters along the streamline passing through
the axis of symmetry. The calculated ratio of specic heats is close to the classical value   3.
The system of equations used in the method for
reconstructing ow characteristics does not involve
the energy balance equation. This allows us to extend this method formally to the chemical conversion zone as well though the assumptions made
above become here somewhat incorrect. The real
process in this zone is not isentropic and the state
cannot be considered as thermodynamically equilibrium. Nevertheless the parameter distributions
along the charge axis have regions of a drastic decrease in the values of the parameters which can
be approximately correlated with the chemical conversion zone. Continuing our considerations and
interpreting the derivative p as a squared velocity of sound c we determine the position of the
sonic surface from the equality v  c which is
the Chapman-Jouguet condition in the coordinate
system moving with the velocity of the detonation
front. The thus-calculated sonic surface is shown in
Fig. 7 points on the dependences from Fig. 5.
The spatial error of reconstructing the ow characteristics is rather low 12 detector channels
which is  0.2 mm. Based on the statistical data
Fig. 4. Spatial distributions of parameters during
detonation of a cylindrical plastic-bonded TATB explosive density 1.85 gcc in 3 mks after initiation a pressure b density c particle velocity
in a xed coordinate system the point is the sonic
zcmrcmpGParcm-2.0-1.00.001201020304051015zcmrcmgcc-2.0-1.00.001201230.511.522.5012-2.0-1.00.0zcmrcmva
Spatial distributions of parameters on
the axis during detonation of a cylindrical plasticbonded TATB explosive density 1.85 gcc in 3 mks
after initiation a pressure b density c particle
velocity in a xed coordinate system the point is
Fig. 6. Unloading adiabat of detonation products  ln p ln  constructed along the streamline passing through the charge axis.
Fig. 7. Sonic boundary.
of three experiments with the interval between the
frames of 0.5 mks the overall time resolution is
 0.2 mks. The accuracy of determining the values of the gas-dynamic characteristics is corrected
by the conservation laws used and is estimated to be
at least 90 at the time scale of 0.5 mks. The values
obtained in the energy release zone at the time scale
of 0.2 mks should be considered as estimates.
Methods developed on the basis of using synchrotron radiation offer new possibilities in studying detonation processes in condensed high explosives. In the case of steady detonation we managed
to measure the density distribution on the detonation
01020304050-2.5-2.0-1.5-1-0.5-0.00.5zcmpGPa00.511.522.533.5-2.5-2.0-1.5-1-0.5-0.00.5zcmgcc-3-2-10123-2.5-2.0-1.5-1-0.5-0.00.5zcmvzkms11.522.533.500.511.522.53gcczcmrcmvckms-2.0-1.00.0012-2024681012wave front and in expanding products. A method of
reconstruction of the remaining gas-dynamic characteristics of the ow of detonating charges velocity and pressure on the basis of the space and time
distributions was proposed and tested. The results
allowed us to reconstruct the unloading adiabat of
detonation products.Continuum Modeling of the - Phase Transformation of RDX 
Rahul and Suvranu De 
Department of Mechanical Aerospace and Nuclear Engineering 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Troy NY 12180 U.S.A. 
Abstract.  We  develop  a  thermodynamically  consistent  continuum  phase  field  model  to 
investigate the role of deformation driven - phase transition in the sensitivity of RDX. 
Dislocations  and  phase  transformations  are  distinguished  and  modeled  within  a  crystal 
plasticity  framework.  The  Landau  potential  is  derived  for  the  finite  elastic  deformation 
analysis. The response of the externally stressed RDX crystal is obtained by solving the 
continuum momentum equation along with phase evolution equation using a Helmholtz 
free  energy  functional  which  consists  of  elastic  potential  energy  and  local  interfacial 
energy that follows from the CahnHilliard formalism. Our simulations suggest that the 
- phase transformation in RDX may be associated with the increased temperature rise 
and hence the sensitivity. 
The role of molecular structure on sensitivity 
of  energetic  materials  has  been  long  established.1 
Many of the factors that influence the performance 
of energetic materials including sensitivity rate of 
deflagration  to  detonation  transition  detonation 
velocity  detonation  pressure  crystal  density 
thermal  and  shock  stability  ultimately  depend  on 
polymorphic  modifications  which  are  often 
ignored.2  The  structural  change  accompanying 
phase  transformation  involves  an  increase  or 
decrease in intermolecular interactions that likely 
serve to precondition the material for the onset of 
chemical  decomposition  at  higher 
Understanding  and  predicting  the  effect  of  phase 
transformations  on 
parameters  for  transition  to  detonation  in  high 
thermomechanical  stimuli  has  therefore  been  an 
important and challenging problem. At its heart is 
the  need  to  understand  the  complex  deformation 
processes by which localization of energy can lead 
to  regions  in  the  material  with  sufficiently  high 
temperature and stress conditions to promote rapid 
molecular  decomposition.  Here  we  model  the 
deformation induced - phase transition in RDX 
to investigate its role in the sensitivity. 
compression45  modeling 
While phase-transformation studies have been 
performed  for  RDX  cyclo-135-trimethylene246-trinitramine  using  both  static3  and  shock 
transformation that accounts for crystal orientation 
and  defect  evolution  has  received  much  less 
attention. RDX is known to exist as    and  
polymorphs  with  the  -phase  being  most  stable 
observations  establish  that  RDX  undergoes  a  - 
phase transformation in the pressure range of 3.54.5  GPa.3  The  -  phase  transition  involves  a 
decrease in unit cell volume of about 3 and leads 
to  changes  in  the  space  group  and  molecular 
conformations.5  The  -RDX  has  an  orthorhombic 
structure with Pbca space group whereas -RDX 
has  an  orthorhombic  structure  of  Pca21  space 
group. An open question is the relative sensitivities 
We  have  developed  a  thermodynamically 
consistent  continuum  phase 
investigate  the  role  of  deformation  driven  - 
the  sensitivity  of  RDX. 
Dislocations  and  phase 
transformations  are 
distinguished  and  modeled  within  a  crystal 
plasticity  framework.  The  Landau  potential  is 
derived for the finite elastic deformation analysis. 
The  response  of  the  externally  stressed  RDX 
crystal  is  obtained  by  solving  the  continuum 
momentum  equation  along  with  phase  evolution 
equation using a Helmholtz free energy functional 
which consists of elastic potential energy and local 
interfacial  energy  that  follows  from  the  Cahn
Hilliard formalism.6 
In the following sections we derive the phase 
field  model  for  the  -  phase  transition  in  RDX. 
We  next  present  numerical  examples  and 
discussion followed by conclusion.  
Phase Field Modeling 
sometimes  called  an 
We  develop  a  thermodynamically  consistent 
transformation in molecular single crystal of RDX. 
The  single  crystal  plasticity  model  is  extended  to 
include  phase  transformation  phenomena  using  a 
phase field formulation. In the phase field model a 
introduced  to  reflect  a  continuum  measure  of 
molecular  orderdisorder  of  the  different  phases. 
The present work deals with non-conserved order 
is  associated  with  crystal 
orientation. We start with a crystal all of which is 
the  same  Phase-I.  As  it  deforms  under  loading 
Phase-I  may  transform  to  another  Phase-II.  We 
introduce a normalized order parameter  01  
to account for this structural transformation where 
 0   and  1  denotes  Phase-I  and 
respectively  and   01   at 
shear flow is expressed as 
boundary.  For  simplicity  we  do  not  consider 
secondary phase transformation in our model. 
We  adopt  a  multiplicative  decomposition  of 
the deformation gradient tensor F into plastic part 
F p  and elastic part  Fe  as 
F  FeF p det Fe  0 det F p 1 
where  F p  describes local plastic deformation due 
to  plastic  slip  on  crystallographic  plane  while 
preserving  the  crystal  lattice  orientation.  The 
lattice deformation and local rigid body rotation is 
represented by  Fe . 
The  spatial  velocity  gradient  of  the  plastic 
f 1 1  and  vanishing  derivative  condition  at 
rate  on  slip  system    in  the  parent  region  of 
phase  i 12   with  slip  direction  si
 in the reference configuration. 
The overall specific Helmholtz free energy of 
a crystal is assumed as 
where    is  the  temperature    denotes  the 
gradient  of  phase  parameter  and  qn   is  the  set  of 
internal variables that evolve with plastic loading. 
The order parameter  is used as criteria for phase 
initiation  whereas   
evolution and growth.  
field  ClausiusDuhem 
For  all  admissible  deformations  temperature 
imposes  the  following  restrictions  on  first  PiolaKirchhoff  stress  tensor  P  configurational  stress7 
We require the phase change to be dissipative 
which leads to the phase field evolution equation 
with   0   a  constitutive  modulus.  Given  a 
such  as  quadratic 
dependence of  on   we can generate a time 
dependent  Ginzburg-Landau  equation  and  1   is 
recognizable  as  a  kinetic  rate  constant  for  the 
phase transformation. 
In  the  absence  of  heat  transfer  or  internal 
energy source in the system temperature evolution 
follows from the energy balance as 
2 l .8 The strain energy density is 
where  Ee  is the Green-Lagrange strain tensor and 
the  forth  order  elasticity  tensor  is  defined  as 
The  effect  of  microstructural  evolution  is 
accounted using a thermomechanical based crystal 
plasticity  model.  A  major  part  of  a  crystal 
plasticity  problem  is  to  uniquely  determine  the 
plastic slip rates  !i
  that satisfy the plastic flow 
  on each slip system9 
where  cv  and    denotes phase dependent specific 
heat  at  constant  deformation 
Grneisen  tensor  respectively  and  Ce  FeTFe   is 
the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor. 
To  obtain  a  specific  form  of  the  constitutive 
descriptions  we  assume  that  the  Helmholtz  free 
energy  can  be  partitioned 
associated  with  elastic  potential  energy  3   and 
phase change e.g. phase transition energy density 
2   and  potential  energies  stored  at  the  phase 
boundaries  1   i.e.  1 2 3 .  The  local 
interfacial  energy  per  unit  reference  volume 
follows from the CahnHilliard formalism 6 
where  A  0   represents  the  potential  well  depth 
for  the  double  well  potential.  In  the  isotropic 
approximation driving force A and parameter  are 
related  to  equilibrium  energy  per  unit  area    and 
l  of  an  unstressed 
where    is  the  resolved  shear  stress  and  y
the  slip  resistance  on  the    slip  plane.  The 
resolved shear stress on any slip system  may be 
crystallographic  slip  is  governed  by  the  plastic 
flow  condition  Eq.  10 
evolution equation for the slip resistance  y
slip hardening laws have not been experimentally 
well investigated for molecular crystals. Hence in 
the  current  work  we  assume  a  simple  hardening 
model proposed by Chang and Asaro.10 
The governing set of equations to solve for the 
phase  change  model  without  chemical  reaction 
includes  the  well-known  conservation  of  mass 
momentum  and  energy  equations  of  continuum 
mechanics  coupled  with  phase  evolution  Eq.  5. 
is  a  set  of  coupled  nonlinear  partial 
differential  equations  that  is  discretized  using  the 
finite  element  method  and  solved  using 
Newton-Raphson numerical technique. 
Results and Discussion 
We investigate the role of deformation driven 
-  phase  transition  in  the  sensitivity  of  RDX 
using  the  thermomechanical  phase  field  model 
developed  in  previous  section.  A  finite  element 
computational model is developed to simulate the 
gas  gun  tests.  The  computational  model  of  a  bar 
with  dimension  1.00.10.1mm3  is  discretized 
using  18000  tri-linear  hexahedral  finite  elements 
with  eight  Gauss  points  per  element.  A  time 
varying  pressure  load  is  ramped-up  from  zero  to 
the 5.2GPa pressure in 1.0ns and applied to one of 
the faces normal to the axial direction of the bar 
while the opposite face is maintained traction-free. 
The four faces of the models normal to the loading 
direction  are  constrained  such 
that  a  onedimensional wave could travel through the length 
of  the  bar.  Artificial  viscosity  terms  have  been 
included for conditioning the numerical solution at 
-RDX crystallizes in the orthorhombic space 
group Pbca whereas -RDX has an orthorhombic 
structure  of  Pca21  space  group.  The 
parameters for -RDX molecular crystal are taken 
from  Choi  and  Prince11  and  for  -RDX  from 
Davidson et al.12 The slip-systems for -RDX are 
not  reported  in  literature  therefore  we  consider 
similar sets of slip-systems for both - and -RDX 
i.e. 010001 021100 and 021100 . There 
are  also  three  favored  cleavage  planes  of  001 
100 and 010 and an additional 021 has been 
identified.  However  we  do  not  include  cleavage 
mechanisms  and  damage  in  this  work.  We  only 
consider deformation due to crystallographic slip.  
The  elasticity  tensor  moduli  for  the  -RDX 
under  ambient  condition  are  taken  from  the 
experimental  work  of  Sun  et  al.13.  The  pressure 
dependent  elastic  constants 
computed  using  Molecular  Dynamics  simulation 
results  reported  by  Sewell  and  Bennett.14  Such 
pressure varying elasticity tensor moduli for the RDX  is  not  reported  in  literature.  The  elasticity 
constants for the  -RDX at 300K and 5.2GPa are 
taken  from  Munday  et  al.15  The  hardening 
parameters  associated  with 
the  single  crystal 
model  are  taken  from  De  et  al.16  The  pressure 
change  due  to  the  volumetric  change  in  the 
material  is  captured  using  the  third-order  Birch
in  RDX 
Murnaghan  BM  equation  of  state  EOS.  The 
parameter  for  the  BMEOS  is  obtained  from  the 
experimental work of Olinger et al.17 The density 
of  -RDX  is  considered  from  the  experimental 
work  of  Choi  and  Prince11  and  for  -RDX  from 
Davidson  et  al.12  The  thermal  parameter  such  as 
specific heat capacity and Grneisen parameter is 
taken  from  Cawkwell  et  al.18  The  phase-field 
parameters  such  as  interface  surface  energy  and 
interface  boundary  thickness  are  considered  as 
45mJm2 and single lattice thickness respectively. 
We  simulate  the  shock-induced  -  phase 
100001 crystallographic orientation. In Fig. 1a 
we observe that as the shock wave travel along the 
longitudinal  direction  of 
transforms to the  -phase. In Fig. 1b we see that 
the maximum uniaxial compressive stress develop 
behind  the  shock  front  in  the  -phase.  We  also 
observe  slight  stress  relaxation  behind  the  elastic 
wave. Notice that the phase evolution slightly lags 
behind  the  dilatational  wave  front  which  is 
consistent  with  the  experimental  observation  that 
the phase transition requires finite time to occur.4 
temperature  variation 
associated with the - phase transition in RDX. In 
Fig.  1c  we  see  that  the  maximum  temperature 
evolves behind the shock front in the -phase. The 
temperature  variation 
in  case  of  -  phase 
transition is significantly higher Fig. 1c than that 
of  the  shock  loaded  -RDX  Fig.  2b  which 
suggests that the - phase transformation in RDX 
is  associated  with  the  increased  temperature  rise 
and hence the sensitivity of RDX. 
Next we compare uniaxial compressive stress 
in  shock-loaded  RDX  that  undergoes  -  phase 
transformation  Fig.  1b  with  that  of  the  pure  phase  Fig.  2a.  We  observe  that  the  maximum 
stress develops behind the shock front for both the 
cases.  However  the  dilatational  wave  speed  is 
more in -RDX than that of the -phase which is 
due  to  the  larger  C33  component  of  the  elasticity 
tensor  and  smaller  density  of  the  -phase  in 
comparison with the -RDX as per the definition 
of the dilatational wave speed in elastic solids. Our 
simulations suggest that phase transformation can 
deformation  for  the  purely  elastic  100001 
orientation leading to more temperature rise as we 
observe in Fig. 1c. 
Fig.  1.  Shock  induced  -  phase  transformation  of  RDX  a  phase  evolution  b  uniaxial  compressive 
stress GPa and c temperature evolution K for 100001 crystal orientation. 
Fig.  2.  The  a  uniaxial  compressive  stress  GPa  and  b  temperature  K  evolution  in  shock  loaded 
for  pressure  dependent  elasticity 
single  crystal  of  -RDX 
We  study  the  static  response  of  -  phase 
transition of RDX. In Fig. 3 we plot the pressurevolume  curve  for  the  displacement  controlled 
uniaxial  compression  test  on  a  cubic  sample  of 
100001  RDX  single  crystal.  As  we  see  in  the 
plot  the  pressure-volume  curve  is  in  agreement 
with the experimentally obtained pressure-volume 
data.17  In  Fig.  4a  we  compare  the  temperature 
evolution for the elastic that is 100 and elasticplastic  210  111  and  110  direction  with 
temperature  rise  due  both  plastic  slip  shown  in 
Fig.  4b  and  volumetric  changes.  Large  sterichindrance along 100 direction prevents slip as we 
can see in the Fig. 4b which leads to larger elastic 
part  and  hence  maximum  volume  reduction  that 
orientation  than  others  and  hence  deemed  most 
sensitive.  These  results  are  all  consistent  with 
experimental observations.19 
Fig.  3.  Pressure-volume  curve  for  the  100001 
single crystal of RDX. 
in  RDX.  We  observe 
field  model  has  been  developed 
A  thermodynamically  consistent  continuum 
investigate  the  role  of  deformation  driven  - 
phase  transition  in  the  sensitivity  of  RDX.  We 
verify that crystalline slip can accommodate large 
orientations  for  which  there  is  a  resolved  shear 
stress along the slip direction the material absorbs 
large  shear  strain  through  plastic  deformation 
allowing it to be less sensitive as less mechanical 
work  is  available  for  temperature  rise.  Therefore 
plastic slip should be associated with greater shear 
relaxation  and  hence  decreased  sensitivity.  For 
elastic  orientations  large  shear  stress  arises  from 
steric  hindrance  that  may  provides  much  more 
mechanical  work  to  increase  the  temperature  and 
to  detonation.  Our 
simulations  suggest  that  the  shock-induced  - 
phase  transformation  in  RDX  may  be  associated 
with the increased temperature rise and hence the 
sensitivity.  However  it  remains  inconclusive  in 
the absence of more consistent material parameters 
such as pressure dependent elasticity tensor moduli 
and hardening parameters for both - and -RDX. 
The  authors  gratefully  acknowledge 
support  of  this  work  through  Office  of  Naval 
Research  ONR  grants  N000140810462  and 
N000141210527 with Dr. Clifford Bedford as the 
cognizant Program Manager. Requirements for Simulating the Transmitted Wave Profile through Metal Barriers 
Leah Tuttle Seth Root Bob Schmitt and Eric Harstad 
Sandia National Lab 
Abstract. The purpose of this study is to examine the modeling requirements necessary to 
accurately  simulate  the  transmitted  wave  profile  from  a  detonating  insensitive  high 
explosive IHE through metal barriers. The future goal of the experimental and modeling 
efforts is to improve our understanding of and ability to model gap tests by examining the 
transmitted  wave  that  is  seen  by  an  acceptor  explosive.  Unlike  standard  gap  tests  the 
experimental setup is intentionally one-dimensional uniaxial strain. Also unlike standard 
gap tests the first step undertaken in this study was to characterize the transmitted wave 
profile. To accomplish this task a powder gun was used to launch a copper projectile into 
the  explosive  sample.  At  the  impact  conditions  the  explosive  undergoes  shock-todetonation transition SDT within the sample thickness. The experiment was designed to 
allow for the measurement of the particle velocities at both the back side of the explosive 
sample and after the wave was transmitted through a metal barrier. The data can be used 
to estimate the SDT run distance and peak pressure in the explosive wave structure. The 
advantages  of  this  experimental  design  are  the  simplifications  for  experimental 
measurements  and  simulations.  The  disadvantages  are  that  the  SDT  process  creates 
accelerating waves and wave profiles that require additional modeling fidelity. A reactive 
flow model is required to simulate the SDT process. It is demonstrated that the reactive 
flow  model  must  accurately  describe  the  evolution  of  the  initial  shock  through  the 
transition to detonation and the propagation through the remaining explosive thickness.  
Samples of the TATB-based explosive LX-17 
varying  in  thickness  from  approximately  6.6  to  8 
mm were impacted with a copper flyer 1.25 cm 
thick  at  2  kms  in  powder  gun  experiments 
conducted  at  Sandia  National  Laboratories.  Two 
different test configurations were used. In the first 
3  small  aluminum  or  copper  samples  with 
thicknesses of  1 2  and  3  mm  were  bonded  via  a 
glue layer to a large disc of LX-17. A LiF window 
was  bonded  to  each  metal  sample  in  order  to 
provide  a  viewing  window  for  VISAR1  to  record 
particle velocity profiles at the metalLiF interface. 
Additionally in these tests 3 NaCl windows were 
bonded via glue layer a few microns in thickness 
directly  to  the  LX-17  explosive  sample  to  allow 
VISAR to record the particle velocity profile at the 
experimental configuration is shown in Fig. 1.  
At the flyer plate impact conditions the explosive 
undergoes  a  shock-to-detonation  transition  SDT 
within  the  sample  thickness.  The  history  variable 
reactive  burn  HVRB  reactive  flow  model  was 
selected  as  a  first  approximation  to  simulate  the 
explosive response3. To reproduce the structure of 
the transmitted wave it is necessary to accurately 
simulate  the  SDT  process  and  the  post-transition 
evolution of the detonation wave. Variations in the 
computational results were examined for a variety 
of  equations  of  state  EOSs  and  HVRB  model 
parameters.  These  variations  were  used  to  help 
guide  model  parameterization.  The  results  of  the 
simulations are compared to the test results and a 
discussion  is  provided  as  to  the  limitations  of 
current modeling techniques and future directions 
for  improving  the  explosive  model  representation 
and experimental design.  
CTH and Model Descriptions 
CTH is an Eulerian shock wave physics code. 
It has been in development continuously at Sandia 
National  Laboratories  for  more  than  25  years. 
CTH  includes  a  variety  of  EOSs  and  numerous 
constitutive  models  appropriate  for  modeling 
explosives  and  high-rate  mechanical  deformation 
under shock-loading conditions.  
The  HVRB  model  was  used  in  this  analysis. 
The  HVRB  model  is  comprised  of  three  main 
components  an  unreacted  EOS  a  detonation 
product  EOS  and  a  reaction  model  with  mixture 
assumptions.  The  reaction  model  is  typically 
calibrated  to  match  Pop  plot  data4.  The  HVRB 
model  has  been  demonstrated 
simulate the SDT process in terms of run distance. 
However the simplified model does not accurately 
reproduce the detailed wave evolution that occurs 
during SDT as measured by Gustavsen56. As part 
of this study modeling requirements to accurately 
simulate  additional  aspects  of 
The  unreacted  explosive  EOS  is  typically  fit 
to  the  shock  velocity-particle  velocity  Us-Up 
relationship  derived  from  wedge  tests  and  other 
flyer-plate impact experiments. This experimental 
data  has  a  much  larger  scatter  than  traditional 
shock Hugoniot data and is only available at lower 
three  NaCl  windows  and 
Fig.  1  The  experimental  test  configuration  is 
metalLiF  windows  on  top  of  the  explosive 
The second test configuration had samples of 
tantalum at thicknesses of 1 2 3 and 4 mm glued 
to a disc of LX-17 approximately 8 mm thick also 
with  LiF  windows  providing  a  viewing  window 
for  VISAR.  These  tests  did  not  include  the  NaCl 
windows at the explosive interface so no data on 
the  wave  profile  at  the  backside  of  the  explosive 
The experimental variation in the flyer impact 
velocity was estimated to be less than 10 ms in all 
but  one  of  the  four  tests  conducted.  The  LX-17 
sample  thickness  was  measured  at  17  individual 
locations each location was measured 3 times for 
each disc of explosive for a total of 51 thickness 
measurements.  Variation  in  these  measurements 
was  on  the  order  of  10  m.  Neither  of  these 
experimental factors is likely to have a significant 
effect on the experimental results.  
Simulations were performed in one dimension 
for  each  sample  copper  flyer  explosive  NaCl 
stacking  using  the  Eulerian  shock  physics  code 
CTH  which  was  developed  at  Sandia  National 
Laboratories2. The future goal of the experimental 
and  modeling  efforts 
understanding of and ability to model gap tests by 
examining the transmitted wave that is seen by an 
acceptor explosive. Unlike a standard gap tests the 
onedimensional uniaxial  strain. Also unlike  standard 
gap  tests  the  first  step  undertaken  in  this  study 
was  to  characterize  the  transmitted  wave  profile. 
shock pressures. Reactive flow models require that 
the  unreacted  explosive  yields 
information  at  conditions  occurring 
during  the  SDT  process  and  detonation  wave 
propagation.  These  conditions  occur  at  much 
greater  pressures  than  the  typical  wedge  test 
impact  pressure.  The  HVRB  model  in  CTH 
typically uses a Mie-Gruneisen model to describe 
the  EOS  surface.  However  more  complex  EOS 
surfaces can be represented using Sesame tables. 
the  advantage  of  representing 
In  CTH  the  detonation  product  EOS  is 
typically described by a Sesame table. The Sesame 
complete  EOS  surface.  Therefore 
Sesame  table  can  be  used  over  a  broad  range  of 
initial  explosive  densities.  Another  widely  used 
detonation  product  EOS  is  the  Jones-Wilkins-Lee 
JWL  model7.  The  JWL  EOS  has  a  simple 
analytic  form  that  is  calibrated  to  the  isentropic 
expansion  from  the  CJ  state.  The  JWL  EOS 
constants  are  valid  for  a  particular  reference 
density  and  must  be  adjusted  for  changes  in 
density  or  detonation  velocity.  The  most  relevant 
fits for this study are for LX-17 at 1.9 gcc.  
The  HVRB  model  specifies  the  reaction 
completely  unreacted  to  completely  reacted.  The 
model  employs  a  simple  mixture  rule  which  by 
default requires reactants and products to be at the 
same  density  and  temperature  to  calculate  the 
intermediate  states  as  needed.  The  pressurevolume  Hugoniots  for  two  unreacted  and  two 
detonation product EOSs are shown in Fig. 2. As 
expected  the  unreacted  EOSs  agree  at  lower 
pressures  but  diverge  at  higher  pressures. 
Similarly the detonation products EOSs agree at 
the  CJ  state  and  below  but  vary  above  the  CJ 
state.  The  reaction  model  must  use  the  mixture 
assumptions to calculate the partially reacted states 
in  the  regions  where  the  EOSs  have  the  most 
test  data  and  newer 
experimental  run  distance  results  were  presented 
by  Gustavsen6.  Gustavsen  fit  a  subset  of  the 
combination  of  new  and  old  data  and  created  the 
mean  Pop  plot  as  shown  in  Fig.  3.  The  Pop  plot 
created  from  a  HVRB  model  calibrated  to  a 
different  set  of  Pop  plot  parameters  is  shown  in 
light  blue  for  comparison.  The  parameters  of  the 
HVRB model used initially for this study as fit to 
the nominal Gustavsen pop-plot line are given in 
Table 3 HVRB parameters fit to the nominal 
Gustavsen pop-plot line. 
Fig.  2  Pressure-Volume  Hugoniot  curves  for  two 
reacted  dashed  and  unreacted  solid  EOS 
combinations for LX-17. 
Fig.  3  Pop  plots  for  LX-17  are  shown  for 
Gustavsens  fit  green  symbols  and  a  HVRB 
blue solid model parameterization. 
It is necessary to evaluate the role of the EOS 
choices  and  reaction  model  calibration  on  the 
ability of the model to accurately simulate the SDT 
process  and  detonation  wave  evolution.  Other 
experimental  evidence 
including  Gustavsens 
magnetic  induction  velocimetry  measurements 
establishes  that  the  CJ  detonation  wave  velocity 
should  be  approximately  7.6  kms.  The  original 
Sesame table in CTH was based theoretically upon 
thermochemical  equilibrium  calculations.  It  is 
detonation  velocity.  The  overprediction  is  tied  to 
nonideal  detonation  behavior  and  the  possible 
formation  of  different  forms  of  carbon.  The 
creation of a new Sesame table is discussed later in 
these  estimates  overpredict 
For  the  experimental  configuration  discussed 
CopperLX-17 interface yields an impact pressure 
of  approximately  18  GPa  and  an  initial  shock 
velocity in the LX-17 of approximately 6.1 kms. 
Here  the  impactor  is  a  thick  copper  flyer  plate 
traveling  nominally  at  2  kms 
experimental  information  can  be  found  in  a 
companion  paper8.  The  impedance  match  was 
calculated  using  the  linear  Us-Up  relationships 
presented in Table 1. 
Table  1.    Constants  used  for  the  linear  Us-Up 
relationship for the shock impedance calculation. 
Material  0gcc  C0kms 
The input pressure of 18 GPa can be used to 
estimate  the  run-distance  from  Pop  plot  data  or 
the data fit. Based on the available Pop plot data 
and  available  confidence  intervals6  at  the  input 
pressure  estimated  above  the  run-distance  to 
detonation  could  vary  from  1.75  to  5.4  mm  with 
the  mean  value  of  3.1  mm.  As  the  explosive 
samples in this set of experiments range from 6.5 
to  8  mm  the  run-distance  makes up  a significant 
portion of the total sample thickness. 
The  measured  detonation  velocity  for  a  1.9 
gcc LX-17 sample impacted at approximately 15 
parameterization  plotted  Fig.  2  agrees  with  this 
measured  detonation  velocity.  The  parameters  of 
this model are included here in Table 2. However 
as mentioned previously the LX-17 Sesame table 
approximately  7  .  It  was  necessary  to  create  a 
new Sesame table that better matches the measured 
detonation velocity. 
Table 2 JWL parameters for LX-17. 
The new  Sesame  table  was created using  the 
Sandia  code  TIGER910.  To  account  for 
nonideal thermochemical behavior of LX-17 it was 
necessary to eliminate some chemical species from 
library.  The  detonation 
the  reaction  product 
velocity  was  more 
However  it  is  necessary  to  continue  to  evaluate 
the  ability  of  the  new  Sesame  table  to  accurately 
response used by the HVRB reactive flow model. 
The  CJ  state  for  the  new  Sesame  table  was 
calculated  as  7.59  mms  with  a  detonation 
pressure of 27.6 GPa.  
An  estimate  of  the  transit  time  across  the 
explosive sample can be made if the initial shock 
velocity run distance and detonation velocity are 
known  or  assumed.  The  transit  time  across  the 
sample  is  estimated  in  Eq.  1  where  Us  is  the 
initial shock velocity x is the run distance DCJ is 
the  detonation  velocity  and  W  refers  to  the 
thickness  of  the  explosive  sample.  This  equation 
assumes  that  the  transition  between  shock  and 
detonation  velocities  happens 
This  estimate  of  the  transit  time  is  useful  for 
examining the sensitivity of the model result to the 
uncertainties in the measurements.  
The  previously  estimated  shock  and  detonation 
velocities are used in Eq. 1. The difference in run 
distance  predicted  by 
the  various  Pop  plot 
parameterizations  and  confidence  intervals  result 
in a potential difference in transit time of 60 ns. 
The run distance is likely to have the largest effect 
on simulation timing and wave profile results. An 
approximate  run-distance  can  be  estimated  from 
the  experimental  data  using  the  time-of-arrival  at 
the  LX-17NaCl  window.  The 
varies  from  1.007  to  1.026  s.  This  suggests  the 
run-distance calculated from Eq. 1 varies from 4.3 
to  4.9  mm.  This  distance  is  significantly  longer 
simulation  results  both  using  the  Mie-Gruneisen 
EOS for the unreacted EOS and the HVRB model 
calibrated  to  a  Pop  plot  with  a  run  distance  of 
approximately 4.4 mm at the test conditions. One 
was run with a JWL EOS for the reacted products 
and the other with the Sesame EOS. These results 
both predict arrival of the detonation at the NACL 
interface  about  15  ns  earlier  than  the  test  data 
uncertainty for the Pop plot run distance data.  
To  compare  to  the  experimental  data  it  is 
justified  to  add  a  shift  in  the  time  that  represents 
the  uncertainty  in  the  run  distance.  It  is  also  of 
interest  to  modify  the  HVRB  calibration  to  shift 
the calculated results in terms of run distance and 
compare  to  the  experimental  measurements.  The 
most uncertainty lies in capturing the sensitivity of 
this  explosive.  Gustavsen  provided  confidence 
than  the  mean  Pop  plot  run  distance  of  3.1  mm. 
Therefore the wave from a model calibrated to the 
mean  Pop  plot  will  always  arrive  at  the  LX17NaCl interface sooner than the data indicates. 
1D  simulations  were  performed  with  a  mesh 
resolution  of  20  m.  Initial  simulations  included 
the  copper  flyer  at  a  thickness  of  1.27  cm  the 
explosive layer at a thickness of 6.588 mm and a 
thick  NACL  window.  Time  history  tracers  were 
placed at the interface of the explosive and NACL 
window  and  20  m  into  the  NACL  window.  To 
track the transition to detonation tracers were also 
placed  every  0.325  mm  through  the  explosive 
explosiveNACL  window  is  used  for  comparison 
to the experimental test data. 
An  example  of  the  pressure  at  each  tracer 
through the explosive is shown in Fig. 4. The build 
up  to  detonation  can  be  seen  there  with  full 
detonation  reached  at  approximately  4.4  mm 
which  corresponds  with  the  Pop  plot  from  the 
HVRB model calibrated as shown in Fig. 3. 
Fig.  5  Velocity  data  at  LX-17NaCl  interface 
gray  shown  with  simulation  results  using  the 
reacted products Sesame EOS red and JWL EOS 
intervals  on  the  Pop  plot  fit  he  reported6  given 
here in equation 2. 
The confidence intervals on his data shown in 
Fig.  6  illustrate  that  the  run  distance  at  the 
input  pressure  of  about  18  GPa 
nominally just over 3 mm can be as high as 5.44 
mm.  HVRB  has  the  advantage  of  simplicity  in 
having  two  parameters  that  drive  the  Pop  plot 
behavior of the explosive so this model can easily 
be refit to existing data or refit to capture less or 
more  sensitivity  as  indicated  from  tests.  In  this 
case  less  sensitivity  would  move  the  simulation 
result later in time and better capture the test data. 
Fig.  4  Pressure  through  the  explosive  sample  at 
tracers  spaced  0.325  mm  apart  is  shown  to 
illustrate the developing shock and the transition to 
The  resulting  particle  velocity  profile  at  the 
NACL  interface  is  given  in  Fig.  5  for  two 
Fig. 6. Pop plot fit to data from Gustavsen6 solid 
including confidence intervals dashed. 
After  adjusting  the  parameters  of  the  HVRB 
model  to  mimic  less  sensitive  behavior  closer  to 
the  upper  bound  of  Gustavsens  Pop  plot  curves 
the  simulations  results  from  above  shift  later  in 
time  and  better  match  the  test  data.  The  new 
simulation results are shown in Fig. 7 for the same 
two  previously  run  cases.  The  red  line  represents 
the Sesame EOS and the green the JWL.  
The  pressure  curves  through  the  explosive 
sample  for  the  original  and  newly  calibrated 
HVRB  model  result  are  shown  in  Fig.  8.  The 
original  HVRB  calibration  in  Fig.  8  black  is 
compared with the new calibration red dashed to 
show the developing detonation wave through the 
explosive layer. The post impact particle velocity 
profile  represents  a  combination  of  the  supported 
wave  from  the  copper  flyer  and  the  evolving 
structure of the partially reacted explosive material 
and detonation wave. 
Fig.  7.  Velocity  at  LX-17NaCl  interface  from 
simulation  results  compared  to  test  data  after 
adjustment of the HVRB parameters to mimic less 
sensitive explosive behavior within the bounds of 
the published Pop plot confidence intervals. 
Fig. 8. Pressure through the explosive sample for 
the  original  HVRB  calibration  to  Pop  plot  data 
black  solid  compared  with  the  calibration  to 
more recent Pop plot data red dashed. 
The  experimental  particle  velocity  profiles 
suggest the shock rise time and interaction with the 
NACL window occur on the order of the sampling 
frequency of the experiment. The staggered mesh 
artificial  viscosity  method  employed  by  CTH 
smears the shockwave over several computational 
zones.  In  addition  the  remap  step  from  CTH 
creates  additional  diffusion.  Because  of  the  high 
viscosity  was  reduced  to  decrease  the  extra 
diffusion  and  increase  the  sharpness of  the  shock 
The wave profile shows that the current model 
does not predict the release accurately indicating 
less  release  in  the  simulation  than  is  observed  in 
the  test  data.  HVRB  may  be  too  simple  to 
accurately  represent 
transition  and  wave 
evolution  of  the  detonation.  Tarver11  conducted  a 
series  of  similar  experiments  with  LX-17  and 
various  materials  using  the  ignition  and  growth 
reactive  flow  model 
detonation  features.  Future  work  will  focus  on 
improvements  to  modeling  this  phenomenon  so 
that  the  relevant  features  can  be  more  accurately 
Additional  simulations  were  conducted  to 
include  the  metal  buffer  materials  Al  Cu  and 
Ta.  Using  the  first  test  configuration  with  an 
explosive thickness of 6.588 mm as used above 
simulations were performed with both copper and 
aluminum  buffers  varying  in  thickness  from  1-3 
mm. The results of these simulations are compared 
to  the  test  data  in  Figs.  9  and  10.  The  initial 
particle velocity is over-predicted by a few percent 
for the aluminum buffer plate and for the thinnest 
copper buffer plate. Additionally the release wave 
is  not  accurately  captured  by  the  current  model. 
The  second  test  configuration  consisted  of  4 
samples with thicknesses varying from 1  4 mm. 
This test was performed twice with nominally the 
same  test  conditions.  The  results  of  these  tests 
along  with  the  corresponding  simulation  results 
are  compared  in  Fig.  11.  The  time  differential 
between  the  test  data  and  simulation  results  is  
100  ns  but  simulation  results  were  shifted  to 
match  the  test  results  in  order  to  better  compare 
the  magnitude  and  shape  of  the  velocity  profile. 
Variation between tests is as high at 65 ns due to 
the difference in flyer velocity but the magnitude 
and  shape  of  the  velocity  profiles  were  very 
similar so only the test data with a nominal flyer 
velocity of 2 kms is shown for comparison. 
Fig.  9.  Simulation  results  solid 
compared  to  test  data  with  symbols  for  shock 
through  aluminum  buffers  of  1  2  and  3  mm  in 
Fig.  10.  Simulation  results  solid 
compared  to  test  data  with  symbols  for  shock 
through  copper  buffers  of  1  2  and  3  mm  in 
Fig.  11.  Simulation  results  solid 
compared  to  test  data  from  a  repeated  test  with 
symbols for shock through tantalum buffers of 1 
2 and 3 mm in thickness. 
Simulation  results  for  modeling  LX-17  IHE 
generally under-predicted arrival time of the shock 
at  the  explosive-NACL  interface  using  nominal 
Pop plot data but fell within the uncertainty of the 
published  Pop  plot  data  note  the  data  itself 
suggests the transition occurs later than the mean 
Pop  plot.  Simulation  results  were  sensitive  to 
model choices especially the reactive flow model 
representation  of  the  sensitivity  of  the  explosive. 
Because no characterization was performed on the 
samples before these tests were conducted there is 
no  information  that  would  guide  the  choice  for 
equations of state outside of the standard available 
and known explosive behavior.  
Future testing should include recording data at 
the  explosive-window 
thicknesses  of  explosive  which  would  allow 
inference of more information about the transition 
from  shock  to  detonation  and  evolution  of  the 
detonation wave. This would eliminate some of the 
unknowns  in  the  explosive  behavior  and  better 
allow us to test the ability of the model and CTH 
to capture the relevant physics in this test. The fact 
that  the  release  wave  behavior  at  the  metal 
bufferwindow  interfaces  is  consistently  underpredicted  suggests  that  the  nonideal  behavior  of 
the  explosive  needs 
to  be  modeled  more 
accurately.  These  reported  results  are  consistent 
with  other  researchers  suggesting 
that  postdetonation energy release is responsible for higher 
pressures in the Taylor wave. The modeling of this 
behavior  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  the 
detonation  product  equation  of  state  needs 
Another  potential  area  for  improvement  is  in 
the  reactive  flow  model  itself.  Gustavsens  data6 
shows  measurements  of  particle  velocity  through 
the explosive sample as it transitions to detonation 
that  suggest  according  to  their  interpretation  a 
slow initial reaction of this non-ideal IHE. HVRB 
may  not  in  its  current  state  be  capable  of 
capturing the shape of the transitioning wave. This 
is also affecting the prediction of time of arrival. A 
reactive  flow  model  that  could  1  accurately 
detonation 2 be easily calibrated to Pop plot data 
and  3  capture  the  details  of  the  shape  of  the 
transitioning wave would be an improvement over 
transition  point  from  shock 
Further  investigation  of  the  buffer  EOS  and 
strength  models  may 
understanding  the  shock  profile  as  it  exits  the 
buffer. A better understanding of the shock profile 
is the next step in improving our ability to predict 
gap-test results.    Implementation of CREST reactive burn model into the Straight Streamline
Malcolm Cartwright and S. A. E. G. Falle
Department of Applied Mathematics University of Leeds Leeds LS6 9JT UK
Abstract. The CREST reactive burn model is implemented into the Straight Streamline
Approximation. Due to the form of equation of state it was necessary to write the governing ow equations in a modied form to those previously derived. The derivation of the
modied equations is presented and the model is discussed.
Detonations in rate sticks of non-ideal explosives
can propagate at speeds signicantly lower than
the one-dimensional Chapman-Jouget CJ detonation velocity. This is because multi-dimensional
effects are important for this class of explosives
due to the large reaction zone length behind the
shock. The one-dimensional model is based upon
the assumption that the reaction zone thickness is
much smaller than the charge width such that diameter effects are negligible. For non-ideal explosives such as ANFO the propagation speed has
been found to be 50 of the CJ speed1. This
suggests the ow is not adequately described by
the one-dimensional theory and multi-dimensional
effects such as shock front curvature due to nite
rate-stick diameter need to be considered.
Initiation of a detonation produces a shock wave
that rapidly accelerates through the explosive and
reaches a steady state propagation velocity D. The
shock wave is supported by an exothermic chemical reaction initiated by the shock as it propagates
through the explosive.
Various steady-state detonation models incorporating two-dimensional effects have been devel
oped. The Wood-Kirkwood model2 considers ow
along the central axis with a slightly divergent ow
term. This is an incomplete theory as the divergent ow term must be arbitrarily prescribed often empirically. Another model Detonation Shock
Dynamics DSD considers the asymptotic limit
of weak-shock curvature3 and has been shown to
accurately reproduce shock shapes the shape of
the propagating detonation front when compared
with Direct Numerical Simulation DNS and experiment. However the model assumes that the
detonation speed is asymptotically close to the CJ
speed and is therefore not quantitatively predictive
for highly non-ideal explosives.
A novel approach to solving non-ideal steady
detonations has been developed.
Streamline Approximation SSA assumes that the
streamlines behind the shock are straight but diverging. Previous work has shown that the SSA
predicts shock shapes and diameter effect detonation velocity versus rate-stick diameter curves accurately when compared with high resolution Direct
Numerical Simulation 4. This would suggest that
the SSA could be used as a predictive tool for determining diameter effect curves. To date the SSA has
only been implemented with a polytropic equation
of state and a simple power law reaction rate.
However for practical applications in modelling
real explosives accurately it is necessary to employ
a more sophisticated equation of state and reaction
rate model. To this end the CREST reactive burn
model developed by the AWE is implemented into
the SSA. This paper presents the derivation of the
ow equations for implementing the CREST model
Governing Flow Equations and Equation of
It is assumed that the ow can be described by
the Reactive Euler equations which represent conservation of mass momentum and energy coupled
to a chemical reaction
is the material derivative. Here v is the material
velocity p is the pressure  the density and e the
internal energy per unit mass  is the chemical reaction progress variables   0 for quiescent material   1 for complete reaction and W is the
reaction rate which typically is a function of the
thermodynamic variables.
Equations 1-4 are closed by specifying the
equation of state and the equation governing the
chemical reaction rate. The CREST model employs
a two-phase equation of state where both unreacted
solid and gaseous reaction products are present in
the reacting mixture. The solid phase is assumed to
be on an isentrope to which it was shocked. Simple mixture laws are used to calculate the specic
volume and specic internal energy. The solid and
gaseous phases are assumed to be in pressure equilibrium. The relevant equations for the model are
where E is the specic internal energy V is the
specic volume and P is the pressure. Subscripts
s and g refer to the solid and gas phases respectively. CREST gives explicit expressions for Ps 
PsVs Es and Pg  PgVg Eg. Further details
on the equation of state model can be found in previously published work 5 6.
Given some V E  for a point in the ow
equations 6-9 gives four equations with four
Vs Vg Es and Eg unknowns. As these equations
are implicit an iterative procedure is used to solve
the system at each point in the ow. As a consequence the specic internal energy cannot be written analytically as a function of the other thermodynamic variables. Previous work 4 used an explicit analytical equation of state i.e.
e  ep v  into the Euler equations reducing
them to an equation in velocity coupled to the reaction rate. With the equation of state in the CREST
model this treatment is not possible. An alternative
form of the governing ow equations must be considered that allows for the iterative procedure equations 6-9 to be implemented.
Streamline Model in slab geometry
The detonation is assumed to have reached
steady-state and thus the partial time derivatives in
the Reactive Euler equations can be neglected. For
convenience a shock-attached coordinate system is
used so that the distance y in gure 1 is the distance
behind the shock. For two-dimensional ow the
standard Cartesian x y coordinate system with
y being in the direction of propagation of the detonation wave and x perpendicular to this as show in
gure 1 is converted to a streamline based coordinate system  y where x is now a function of 
and y. It is assumed that the ow can be modelled
by a compressible streamfunction
Fig. 1. Schematic of steady-state detonation. In the shock attached frame the unreacted
explosive ows into the shock wave in the y-direction. The SSA assumes that behind
the shock the ow follows straight but diverging streamlines. The ow speed increases
as the chemical reaction proceeds and goes sonic at the sonic locus.
where u and v are the ow velocities in the x and
y directions respectively. From equation 10 it is
straightforward to show that
Momentum in y direction
Chemical reaction equation
Substituting equation 13 into the continuity
which gives an equation in v. Substituting for v
using 13 into 19 gives
The SSA assumes that the streamlines behind the
shock are straight but diverging. Using this assumption the Euler equations 1-4 are reduced to a set of
ordinary differential equations along each streamline. The equation for continuity is
Momentum in x direction
This is an equation for the ux of momentum along
Finally the momentum 16 and energy 17
equations can be combined and integrated to give
the Bernoulli equation along a streamline
where E0 is a constant determined by the quiescent
state ahead of the shock.
Straight Streamline Approximation
Consider equation 13 assume the streamlines
are straight and we can write
Integrating this equation with respect to y gives
The values of x0 y0 are given by the position of
the shock front and are denoted with subscript f.
where F  is determined from the ratio of the
shock velocities from 23
Taking the partial derivative of 23 with respect
This gives an equation in u. Equations 15 19
and 20 can be used with the y-momentum equation
Taking the partial derivative of 23 with respect
Evaluation of this derivative requires knowledge
of the form of the shock relations for CREST.
We can substitute these results into the equations
for continuity and momentum to obtain a set of governing ow equations for the SSA from equations
which are coupled to the reaction rate equation
Details of the form of W can be found in 6 and references contained therein. Equations 28- 32 can
be integrated along a given streamline and can be
easily combined with the iterative model used by
CREST equations 6-9 to enable the ow variables to be calculated at any point along the streamline.
To solve the complete ow problem the form of
d must be determined.
Solving the Flow Behind the Shock
The strong shock limit is used whereby the ambient pressure ahead of the shock is assumed to
Immediately behind the shock only the
solid phase is present in the equation of state a
small numerical cut-off is required to ensure sufcient amounts of each phase are present when using the mixing model for   104 only the solid
equation of state is used. The oblique shock relations where the shock is modelled as a jump discontinuity subject to the Rankine-Hugoniot conditions
7 are used to determine the ow velocity behind the
shock. From the shock-jump conditions F  can
be calculated using 25. It can be shown 4 that dF
depends on the detonation shock shape via yf  y
f i.e. the local curvature.
For a given value of D equations 28- 32 reduce
to an eigenvalue problem the solution of which
f as a function of y
f . On the central axis
 0 by symmetry and at the edge of the
f must be such that the ow immedirate-stick y
ately behind the shock is sonic. Marching between
these two values and solving the eigenvalue probcid2cid2
f allows for the shockshape to be determined. The boundary condition at the end of the
detonation driving zone were given by generalized
Results and Discussion
 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8
Fig. 2. Reaction zone length versus curvature with
the CREST equation of state for a simple power law
reaction rate equation 32 and the CREST reaction
rate equation. The detonation model used was the
Wood-Kirkwood model2. Reaction zone lengths are
Simulations using the SSA approximation have
not successfully calculated complete shock shapes
up to the external boundary i.e. where the ow is
sonic immediately behind the shock for the CREST
equation of state and reaction rate. This is likely
to be a result of the reaction zone length increasing
as the curvature increases with the CREST reaction
Figure 2 shows the dependence of the reaction
zone length on the curvature for the CREST reaction rate and a simple power law reaction rate. The
specic form of the power law reaction rate was
Here pCJ is the pressure immediately behind the
shock for the CJ model.  was chosen such that the
reaction zone length matched the CREST reaction
zone length for the CJ model.
Figure 2 shows that with the power law reaction rate the reaction zone length monotonically
decreases as a function of curvature. When the
CREST reaction rate is used the reaction zone
length initially decreases in length as the curvature increases. However there is a turning point at
which the reaction zone length increases as a function of curvature. This phenomena may explain why
the SSA is not an adequate model when using the
CREST reaction rate. When the reaction zone distance increases for large curvatures it is likely that
streamlines will be curved. For the power law reaction rate this has a smaller impact as previous work 4
has shown the strealines to be almost straight when
using a power law reaction rate.
Furthermore an Arrhenius type reaction rate using an ideal gas equation of state has been implemented into the SSA and was found to not produce
shock shapes that would match the boundary conditions for an unconned charge. This is further
evidence that for a reaction rate where the reaction
zone length does not decrease as curvature increases
the SSA model does not capture the full dynamics
Direct Numerical Simulations using the CREST
model will be performed to verify the shape of the
streamlines in the reaction zone and a streamline
formulation that considers curved streamlines will
be implemented for the CREST model to see if complete shock shapes can be produced.
The governing equations for the SSA have been
modied so that equations of state requiring iteration to solve the ow variables can be implemented.
The results of the CREST implementation into the
SSA has shown that complete shock shapes cannot be reproduced. This is likely to be due to the
streamlines behind the shock being curved for the
CREST model which the SSA does not consider.
Further work will implement a model that will consider curved streamlines.
The author acknowledges the nancial support ofCan the Accuracy of BKW EOS be Improved? 
Muhamed Suceska Chan Hay Yee Serene Ang How-Ghee 
Nanyang Technological University 50 Nanyang Avenue Block N1-B4a-02 Singapore 639798 
Energetics Research Institute 
          Abstract.  Due  to  its  mathematical  simplicity  and  ease  of  implementation  the  BeckerKistiakowski-Wilson BKW equation of state is still used in thermochemical computer codes to 
predict  detonation  parameters  despite  its  lack  of  rigorous  theoretical  background.  It  gives 
satisfactory agreement between calculated and experimentally obtained detonation parameters for 
many standard high explosives having densities in the range 1  1.9 gcm3. However beyond these 
density limits agreement is generally poor. A number of different parameter sets in BKW EOS 
have  been  proposed  in  order  to  overcome  its  limitations  and  shortcomings  unfortunately  with 
limited  success.  To  address  this  problem  we  applied  an  alternative  approach  which  includes  
optimization of the covolume factors of detonation products obtained by ab-initio calculations to 
match experimental shock Hugoniot data adjustments of the BKW coefficients so as to reproduce 
not  only  experimental  detonation  pressures  and  velocities  but  also  other  detonation  parameters 
introduction  of  a  new  concept  of  densitypressure-dependent  covolume  factors  as  well  as 
modification of the BKW EOS by adding an exponent to the covolume term  x. 
thermochemical equilibrium code EXPLO5 and carried out calculations on a series of explosives 
having densities ranging from 0.25 to 1.9 gcm3. The calculation shows a palpable improvement in 
accuracy at lower densities of explosives. The overall error in predicting detonation pressure and 
velocity  for  the  studied  explosives  expressed  by  the  root  mean  square percent  error  RMS  is 
7.26 and 2.59 respectively. We found the accuracy of modified BKW EOS to be close to the 
accuracy of the physically-based EOS. 
the  modified  BKW  EOS 
Thermochemical  codes  use  thermodynamics 
to  solve  simultaneously  state  variables  and 
chemical composition of detonation products and 
performance1.  One  of  the  most  difficult  parts  of 
accurately describing the equations of state of the 
gases.  Various  gaseous  equations  of  state  EOS 
have been proposed until now to describe behavior 
of the detonation product gases at extremely high 
pressures  and  temperatures.  Some  of  them  are 
Becker-Kistiakowski-Wilson 
modified  Van  der  Waals  EOS3  modified  virial 
Jacobs-Cowperthwaite-Zwisler 
JCZ EOS5  Exp-6 or HMSAMC EOS67 etc. 
semi-empirical  Becker-KistiakowskiWilson BKW EOS is one of the most extensively 
used  despite  the  fact  that  it  does  not  have  a 
rigorous theoretical background. It is usually given 
in the following form28 
where p is the pressure V is the molar gas volume  
and  R  is  the  gas  constant.        and      are 
adjustable  parameters    xi  is  the  mole  fraction  of 
product species and ki  is a parameter proportional 
to  molecular  volume  also  known  as  covolume 
factors or covolumes and Fx is an imperfection 
geometrical  volume  in  3  occupied  by  a 
molecule  rotating  about  its  centre  of  mass  and 
multiplied  by  a  factor  10.469.10.  As  pointed  by 
Fried1  the  term  covolume  factor  is  somewhat  a 
misnomer  and  it  is  best  to  treat  it  as  an  effective 
interaction parameter. In the high density limits it 
acts  as  an  effective  molecular  volume  multiplied 
by a stiffness factor while at lower densities it can 
be related to the viral coefficients. 
The present form of BKW EOS is proposed 
by Cowan and Fickett2 in 1954 and since then the 
form  of  equation  remains  unchanged  but  there 
have  been  a  number  of  attempts  to  optimize 
constants and covolumes in BKW EOS in order to 
parameters. For example Mader10 used two BKW 
sets of parameters BKW-TNT set for high carbon 
explosives  and  BKW-RDX  set  for  high  oxygen 
explosives.    He  used  the  covolumes  of  the  main 
detonation  products  H2O  CO2  CO  N2  adjusted 
to  best  reproduce  experimental  Hugoniot  data. 
Finger et al.11 proposed the BKWR set while Baer 
and Hobbs12 proposed the BKWS parameter set on 
the  basis  of  a  large  product  species  calibration. 
Fried  et  al.1  employed  a  modern  stochastic 
optimization  algorithm 
parameter  set  and  covolumes  BKWC  set  that 
best matched available experimental data.  
The  validity  and  limitation  of  BKW  EOS 
have been discussed by many researchers15121314. 
They  noticed  that  BKW  EOS  fails  to  reproduce 
accurately  detonation  velocities  and  pressures  at 
initial  densities  of  explosives1214.  The 
validity may also be questionable when designing 
new  materials  with 
products are not properly calibrated. 
Table 1. History and modification of BKW EOS 
The main contribution 
Proposed an exponential 
term to describe deviation 
from the ideal gas behavior 
as a function of density by 
substituting  1Vg-b in 
Van der Waals EOS by 
Modified Beckers equation 
by adding adjustable 
constant  and making k a 
function of temperature 
Modified KistiakowskyWilsons equation by 
Calculated ki from Van der 
Optimization of BKW 
constants and covolumes 
Mader10 Finger11 Hobbs 
Souers and Howard113 
Extensive  analysis14  21  of  the  validity  and 
accuracy  of  BKW  EOS  i.e.  various  sets  of 
parameters  and  covolumes  proposed  so  far 
suggests  that  the  adjustment  of  the  constants  and 
covolumes  cannot  give  consistent 
accuracy over broad densitypressure limits. While 
to  reproduce  quite  accurately 
detonation parameters for explosives having initial 
densities 1.2-2.0 gcm3 the error outside this range 
may still be too large. 
In  this  paper  we  present  an  alternative 
approach  to  improve  the  accuracy  of  the  BKW 
EOS  over  a  broad  range  of  pressures  and 
explosives  densities.  The  approach  consists  of 
imperfection  term  Fx-covolume  relationships 
i.e. modification of current form of the BKW EOS.  
For  the  study  we  have  chosen  53  explosive 
formulations that have either practical or research 
importance.  Experimental detonation velocities D 
pressures p densities  heat of detonation Q and 
temperatures  T  for  these  explosive  are  collected 
from  different  sources1217181920.  Densities  range 
from  0.25  to  1.9  gcm3.  To  cover  an  extensive 
range  of  detonation  properties  we  used  a  wide 
range  of  stoichiometries  NO  explosives  NO 
CNO explosives TNM HNE HNB BTF HNO 
explosives  AN  RX-23-AA  RX-23-AB  RX-23AC  CHNO  explosives  HMX  RDX  NG  NQ 
PETN TNT NM Tetryl TATB DATB FOX-7 
and CHNOF explosives FEFO TFNA TFENA. 
This  comprehensive 
comprises carbon-rich explosives TATB TNT as 
well  as  high  oxygen  TNM  HNE  explosives 
lacking hydrogen BTF TNM and carbon RX-23 
series. There are also several non-ideal explosives 
AN TATB included. It should be mentioned that 
experimental  data  may  vary  significantly  the 
detonation  velocities  may  vary  a  few  percent 
while variation of detonation pressures may be 1020 .  
The validity of the BKW EOS i.e. individual 
sets  of  the  BKW  constants  and  covolumes  is 
judged  on  the  basis  of  their  ability  to  reproduce 
experimental detonation parameters of the studied 
Optimization of BKW constants and covolumes 
The  traditional  method  of  calculation  of  the 
covolume  factor  is  using  the  van  der  Waals  radii 
and  Herzbergs  single  bond  covalent  radii10. 
However besides this method the covolume may 
also  be  evaluated  in  the  following  ways  by 
matching experimental shock Hugoniot data10 by 
using  modern  stochastic  optimization  algorithms 
to find values that match experimental detonation 
parameters1 by using ab-initio quantum chemical 
covolumes  obtained  by  different 
methods are in reasonable agreement only for CO2 
CO O2 N2 and CH2O difference is within 15. 
particularly  for  some  larger  molecules  such  as 
CH2O2  CH3OH  and  C2H4  Table  2.  We  have 
found21  that  the  covolumes  derived  by  matching 
experimental  shock  Hugoniot  data  give  the  best 
overall  agreement  between  experimental  and 
predicted  detonation  parameters  p  D  T  CJ  Q 
and  composition  of  detonation  products.    Thus 
we use this set of covolumes BKWN set in our 
Table 2 Some sets of BKW parameters and 
covolumes derived by different methods 
BKW constants and covolume 
BKWC  BKWS  BKWN  Abinitio 
Legend BKWS set is calculated by geometrical 
volume model12 BKWC set is obtained by 
stochastic optimization method1 BKWN set 
obtained by matching experimental Hugoniots 
this work  Ab-initio set obtained by ab-initio 
From  our  previous  works1421  we  drew  the 
following  conclusions.  Firstly  it  is  possible  to 
adjust  BKW  constants  for  covolume  sets  derived 
by  different  methods  to  reproduce  experimental 
detonation velocities and pressures fairly well for 
all  sets  RMS  3-6    for  D    and  7-12    for  p. 
This  suggests  that  the  detonation  velocity  is  a 
rather insensitive function of covolume. However 
different values of covolumes give rather different 
consequently  heats  of  detonation.  For  example  a 
lower formic acid covolume used in BKWN and 
BKWS  sets  results  in  formic  acid  being  an 
important detonation product for HMX RDX and 
PETN  while  a  higher  value  e.g.  ab-initio  set 
does  not  give  any  formic  acid  in  the  detonation 
products.  We  found  that  predicted  detonation 
properties  of  PETN  RDX  and  HMX  at  high 
densities  are  very  sensitive  to  the  covolume  of 
formic  acid.  Thus  we  slightly  modified  this 
covolume  in  different  parameter  sets  to  describe 
more accurately the detonation properties of these 
Secondly  none  of  the  covolume  sets  could 
solve  the  problem  of  overestimated  detonation 
velocities and pressures at lower initial densities of 
explosives.  This  is  illustrated  by  Fig.1  using  the 
BKWC and BKWS sets standard sets in Cheetah 
2.01  code  and  BKWN  sets  standard  set  in 
EXPLO5  code.  For  BKWC  and  BKWS  sets 
calculation  is  done  taking  solid  carbon  to  be  in 
graphite form for all explosives for BKWN set in 
diamond form for TNT TATB DATB and FOX7 and for other explosives in graphite form. 
Fig. 1.  Difference between experimental and 
calculated detonation velocities   
From  Figs.  1  and  2  all  three  sets  seem  to 
reasonably  predict  detonation  velocities  and 
pressures  at  densities  above  1.2  gcm3.  With 
several  exceptions  e.g.  HNO  explosives  for 
BKWC and BKWN sets and CNO explosives for 
BKWS  set  the  error  is  mainly  within  5  for 
detonation  velocities  and  15  for  detonation 
pressures.  However  at  lower  densities  all  the 
parameter  sets  largely  overestimate  detonation 
velocities and pressures. Also there is a clear trend 
of an increase of error with decrease of density.  
Fig. 2. Difference between experimental and 
calculated detonation pressures  
Modification of covolume-density dependence 
The  larger  deviation  of  calculated  p  and  D  at 
lower densities of explosives and at the same time 
good  agreement  at  higher  densities  suggest  that 
dependence of covolume term x on density is not 
accurately  described 
in  BKW  EOS.  Recall 
proposed  by  Becker15  is  given  in  the  form    x   
KVg. This relationship gives satisfactory results at 
high densities where the covolume may be related 
to  molecular  volume  and  where  repulsive  forces 
dominate.  At  lower  densities  where  attraction 
between molecules starts to play an important role 
and  where  the  covolume  may  be  related  to  the 
virial  coefficients 
Accurate  density-  and 
temperature-dependent 
covolumes  are  required  to  accurately  reproduce 
pressure in the entire range of densities.  
the  error  becomes 
The  logical  conclusion  is  that  using  smaller 
covolumes at lower densities will bring values of 
pressure closer to the experimental values i.e. will 
reproduce more accurately p and D. We performed 
such  an  adjustment  of  covolumes  through  the 
following  steps.  The  first  the  true  values  of  the 
imperfection terms at the C-J points FxCJ are 
calculated using experimental values of p and V at 
the C-J point and experimental where available 
or calculated detonation temperatures  
The  imperfection  terms  at  the  C-J  points  are 
calculated  for  30  high  explosives  formulations 
RDX  HMX  PETN  TNT  NM  and  NG  and 
plotted  against  the  density  of  explosive  Fig.  3 
along  with  the  imperfection  term  calculated  by 
EXPLO5 code using the constants0.5 0.29 
covolume  correction  factor  kf  until  the  best 
agreement  is  obtained  between  experimental  and 
calculated p D and  at the C-J point   
  and  KCJ  are  true  corrected  and 
uncorrected  calculated  by  EXPLO5  values  of 
covolume at the C-J point respectively. 
The covolume correction factors obtained in 
this  way  corrected  and  uncorrected 
covolumes  at  the  C-J  points  as  functions  of 
densities  are  shown  in  Fig.  4.  Corrected  vs. 
uncorrected values of the parameter x are shown in 
Fig. 3. Imperfection term at the C-J point vs. 
density of explosive 
experimental and calculated imperfection terms is 
visible  in  the  lower  density  range  Fig  3.  The 
is  dependent  on  values  of  BKW 
constants  used  in  the  calculation  particularly  the 
value  of    the  larger  the    the  smaller  the 
difference  at  lower  densities  but  the difference  at 
high  densities  increases.  Since  the  imperfection 
term is given as Eq.1 
one can modify the Fx value for a given V and T 
by changing the value of the total covolume of gas 
products K. Thus Fx can be adjusted so as to 
match  the  true  value  of  Fx  i.e.  to  match 
experimental p and D. This is done by a trial and 
error  method  by  multiplying  K  by  a  so-called 
Fig. 4. Covolume and covolume correction factor 
vs. density of gaseous detonation products 
Figs.  4  and  5  show  that  the  BKW  EOS 
predicts  accurately  K  and  x  at  high  densities 
however at lower densities the covolume must be 
significantly  reduced  to  reproduce  x  K  and 
The  implementation  of  the  aforementioned 
approach  into  a  thermochemical  code  requires  an 
accurate analytical expression for kff. Further 
since  the  parameter  x  in  BKW  EOS  has  been 
the  expressions  for  the  thermodynamic  functions 
of gas phase detonation products  G S E have 
to be re-derived correspondingly. 
Using  the  BKWN  set  of  covolumes  except 
for formic acid where we used a covolume of 725 
and kf  f dependence given by equation 
where Vg is specific volume of gas phase products 
1g expressed in cm3g we adjusted the BKW 
parameters  to  best  match  the  experimental  p  D 
and T  for the studied explosives. The obtained sets 
of  parameters  denoted  as  BKWN-CC2  set 
BKWN covolumes 0.5 0.056 18.1 and 
1600 is used in a survey of tested explosives.  
The accuracy of prediction of p D and T by 
BKWN-CC2 set is shown in Figs. 5 and 11.  The 
RMS percent error for detonation velocity did not 
change  significantly  as  compared  to  the  BKWN 
set.  However  the  accuracy  at  lower  densities  is 
improved. Larger discrepancies are observed only 
for RX-23 series of explosives difference  5. 
The detonation pressure is slightly lower over the 
entire  range  of  densities  average  difference  is  3.13 .  
Fig. 5. Difference between experimental and 
calculated detonation velocities obtained using 
Modification of Fx-x relationship 
Another approach we applied to improve the 
modification of imperfection term-parameter Fxx relationship. From Fig. 6 one can notice a small 
difference  between 
true  and  uncorrected 
imperfection terms at the C-J points vs. parameter 
x in the lower density range. This small difference 
in  a  significant  difference 
between the calculated and experimental p and D. 
Fig. 6. True and uncorrected imperfection terms at 
the C-J point vs. parameter x  
True  values  of  the  imperfection  term  in  the 
range  of  lower  densities  can  be  obtained  by 
reproduces  experimental  detonation  pressure  and 
velocity. We found that Fx - x dependence can 
be described better by modifying the BKW EOS as 
in Eq. 6 where a new constant  is added  
Introduction  of  an  exponent  in  x  gives 
dependence  over  a  broader  density  range.  We 
derived  the  constants      and    are  by  fitting 
where Fx represents the experimental values of 
imperfection  term  at  the  C-J  points    x  are 
uncorrected vales at the C-J points obtained using 
standard BKW EOS constant A is  added just to 
account for different values of  for the modified 
relationship  A.  The  fitting  gave  a  new  set 
of constants denoted as BKWN-EnRI1 set 0.5 
Implementation of the modified Fx-x relationship 
into a thermochemical code requires re-derivation 
of  the  chemical  potential  of  gas  phase  products 
while functions for S and E remain unchanged.  
Detonation  properties  of  studied  explosives 
are  calculated  using  the  BKWN-EnRI1  set  of 
constants  and  the  BKWN  set  of  covolumes 
modifying covolume of formic acid to 675. The 
results  of  calculations  Figs.  7  and  11  show  that 
the  BKWN-EnRI  set  can  predict  detonation 
velocities  in  the  entire  range  of  densities  more 
detonation  velocities  are  within  5    of 
experimental except for RX-23-AB and HNB for 
which  calculated  D  are  8  lower.  Calculated 
detonation  pressures  are  again  systematically 
lower  than  experimental  over  the  entire  density 
range average difference is  3.84. 
pressures  and  densities  of  practical  interest  in 
detonation.  A  small  value  of    requires  small 
values  of      and    to  reproduce  experimental 
detonation parameters. We found that for a small 
value  of    e.g.  250  just  to  eliminate  pressure 
singularity  problem  at  T0  K  that  0.26  can 
fairly good reproduce detonation temperature. It is 
important  to  note  that  for  0.26  the  pressure 
minimum  on  p-T  curve  obtained  at  constant 
composition and density9 occurs at T  50 K. This 
is  far  below  the  temperatures  of  interest  in 
practical detonation calculations.  
Fig. 7. Difference between experimental and 
calculated p and D using BKW-EnRI1 set of 
Optimization of  and  
We  have  also  analyzed 
parameters    and    on 
calculations.  For  this  purpose  we  varied    from 
0.25  to  1  and      from  0  to  12000.  The  effect  is 
illustrated in Figs. 8 and 9 and Table 2. 
The  results  show  that  a  small  value  of   
0.25 predicts higher T at higher pressures and 
lower  T  at  lower  pressures.  In  contrast  a  high 
value of  1 predicts lower T at high pressures 
lower  pressures.  For  0.5 
predicted  p  and  T  agree  better  with  experimental 
values. Thus it seems that   0.5 as proposed by 
Cowan  and  Fickett2  is  the  best  choice  for 
Fig. 8. Calculated and experimental pressures 
along Hugoniot of N2  0.38  and  varied  
and  adjusted to fit experimental data 
Thus  we  set  the  values  0.26  and  0  in 
the BKWN-EnRI1 set of parameters and adjusted 
 to obtain new set of parameters BKWN-EnRI2 
following  parameters  0.26 
0.154 1.54 0 and 0.925. The accuracy 
of  prediction  of  detonation  properties  using  the 
BKWN-EnRI2  set  predicts  D  with  RMS2.89 
but  p  is  underestimated  over  the  entire  range  of 
densities RMS7.26 average difference  -3.84 
underestimated  average  error    -9.1  RMS   
This  analysis  showed  that    and    do  not 
significantly  affect  p  and  D  but  affect  T.  It  is 
interesting to note that using 0 as proposed by 
Baker  and  0.26  close  to  Bakers  0.25 
experimental  p  and  D  can  be  satisfactorily 
reproduced  the error in predicted p and D using 
set  BKWN-EnRI1  and  BKWN-EnRI2  is  similar. 
However  for  explosives  with  lower  detonation 
temperatures  RX-23  explosives NQ  TNM  etc. 
the BKWN-EnRI2 set gives T which is 100-300K 
lower  and  for  explosives  with  higher  detonation 
temperature T is 100-300K higher e.g. BTF. 
detonation pressures still differ significantly. 
Table  2.  Experimental  and  calculated  detonation 
temperatures  values 
in  parentheses  refer 
Fig. 9.  Calculated and experimental temperatures 
along Hugoniot of N2  0.38  and  varied  
and  adjusted to fit experimental data 
Fig.10. Difference between experimental and 
calculated p and D using BKW-EnRI2 set of 
The accuracy of the proposed modifications of the 
BKW  EOS  is  summarized  in  Fig.  11.  This  data 
along with the data shown in Figs. 1257 and 10 
shows  that  that  proposed  modifications  improved 
the  accuracy  of  prediction  of  detonation  velocity 
over  the  entire  range  of  densities  of  explosives 
lower  densities.  Calculated 
Fig. 11. RMS percent error in predicting 
detonation velocity pressure and temperature 
Modification  of  Fx-x  relationship  Eq.  6 
with  the  BKWN-EnRI1  parameters  set  predicts 
the  detonation  properties  of 
studied  explosives.  The  BKWN-EnRI2  set  of 
parameters gives almost the same level of accuracy 
for  p  and  D  but  underestimates  T.  Furthermore 
the  calibration  of  the  BKW  parameters  for  the 
BKWN-EnRI1  set  is  easier  than  for  the  BKWCC2 due to difficulties in describing correctly the 
kf  f dependence in the low density limits.  
systematically lower detonation pressures 1-4 
except  for  the  BKWS  set  which  also gives  lower 
pressure  at  higher  densities  but  much  higher 
pressures  at  lower  densities    so  the  average 
difference  is  slightly  positive.  The  same  is  also 
noticed  by  Fried  and  Souers13  who  found  that 
most  equilibrium  codes  predict  the  C-J  pressures 
systematically lower than measured. Interestingly 
Green  and  Lee26  who  made  an  extensive  review 
and refinement of earlier measurements of the C-J 
pressures of PETN at LLNL found that previously 
reported values of the C-J pressures should be 6 
lower.  Our  results  for  PETN  closely  agree  with 
Green and Lees corrected pressures. 
Common for all parameter sets tested is that 
they fail to predict accurately detonation properties 
of HNO and CNO explosives. These two types of 
explosives are particularly interesting because they 
few  main  products  CNO 
explosives  produce  CO2  and  N2  while  HNO 
explosives  produce  H2O  N2  and  NH3.  The 
underestimate  p  and  D  for  both  CNO  and  HNO 
explosives D for 6-9  and p more than 15-20. 
Van  Thiel  et  al.27  noticed  the  same  phenomena 
using  an  EOS  based  on  the  Exp-6  intermolecular 
potentials. They attributed this phenomenon to N2CO2  and  N2-H2O  interactions.  We  found  that 
experimental p and D for CNO explosives may be 
reproduced  by  increasing  covolumes  of  CO2  and 
N2 for 5 and for HNO explosives by increasing 
the  covolumes  of  N2  and  H2O  for  8.  This 
suggests  that  the  unlike-pair  interactions  may  be 
covolumes  of  interacting  molecules.  However 
implementation  of  this  approach  would  require 
significant modification of BKW EOS. 
We  presented  two  alternative  methods  of 
improvement of accuracy of the BKW EOS.  It is 
shown  that  the  method  based  on  modification  of 
Fx-x relationship i.e. modification of BKW EOS 
initial  densities  and 
predicts  detonation  velocities  over  a  broad  range 
stoichiometries  of 
explosives  most  accurately.  The  method  predicts 
systematically  lower  detonation  pressures  but 
reduces scattering of results.  
The  modified  BKW  EOS  Eq.  8  with 
BKWN-EnRI1  set  of  parameters  can  accurately 
describe  the  shock  Hugoniots  of  the  detonation 
products  of  the  tested  explosives  as  well  as  the 
expansion  isentrope  and  detonation  energies.  The 
overall accuracy of modified BKW EOS is close to 
the accuracy of theoretically-based EOS. A fast Fourier transform micromechanical upscaling method
for the study of the thermal expansion of a TATB-based pressed explosive
Andrey Ambos Herv Trumel Franois Willot Dominique Jeulin and Maxime Biessy
MINES ParisTech PSL - Research university CMM - Centre for mathematical morphology
35 rue St Honor F-77300 FONTAINEBLEAU France
CEA DAM Le Ripault F-37260 MONTS France
This paper presents the rst phase of development of a multiscale numerical method operating at the microstructureal level for a TATB-based pressed plastic-bonded explosive. It
uses a virtual model of microstructure mimicking the grain size distribution of the actual
material and a Fourier-based numerical scheme. At present the method works with simplied microstructure and linear anisotropic thermoelastic behavior for the constituents.
Neglecting the inter-granular binder leads to fairly overestimated values for isotropic elastic moduli and volumetric coefcient of thermal expansion. A rst attempt to include the
binder yielded much more realistic predictions for elastic moduli but not for the volumetric thermal expansion coefcient. The origin of this discrepancy is thought to lie in the
behavior of constituents.
The quasi-static thermo-mechanical behavior of
TATB-based pressed plastic-bonded explosives is
complex irreversible and highly nonlinear. Progressive damage occurs under quasi-static mechanical loading and slow thermal loads induce irreversible dilation1 2 often referred to as ratchet
These phenomena are still not well understood
but involve necessarily sub-macroscopic processes
such as grain plasticity microcracking or debonding. The rst sub-macroscopic level is the so-called
mesoscopic one at which the individual grains
micro-cracks and grain boundaries become distinct
objects but remain considered as homogeneous objects. This level which will be referred to as the
microstructure level in the sequel is roughly that
of optical microscopy.
The present work is the rst step of the development of a thermo-mechanical computational
method operating at the microstructural level the
objective of which is to link the macroscopic response to the constituents arrangements and behaviors in other words a numerical homogenization
Such a tool requires i a geometrical description
of the microstructure ii a computational method
and iii constitutive models for the constituents and
As no 3D microstructure imaging is available to
date for the material described below the method
will rely on virtual models of microstructure. The
FFT-based upscaling method will be chosen as it
requires no meshing and is not computationally demanding. Finally this rst phase of development
will be performed in the framework of linear thermoelasticity homogeneous temperature elds slow
thermal loads and simplied microstructure.
The studied material
The material considered in the present work is a
TATB-based pressed plastic-bonded explosive containing less than 5 of an amorphous polymeric
binder. The TATB powder is rst coated by the
binder in a slurry process then dried and granulated
yielding about 1 mm diameter prills. The latter are
then isostatically pressed at 200 MPa and moderate
The resulting solid material is relatively easy
to polish using a standard metallographic-like procedure and allows optical microscopy reected
polarized light observations3 4 to be carried out
Fig. 1. The microstructure is characterized by
a coarse millimetric scale representing the vestigial prills hollow white arrows in Fig. 1 and the
ner scale of TATB grains. The latter contain several kinds of aws namely binder-lled voids thin
white arrows in Fig. 1 deformation bands white
arrows and some rare micro-cracks hollow black
arrows. At this scale the presence of inter-granular
binder cannot be detected.
Fig. 1. Optical micrograph polarized reected
light enhanced contrast.
At room temperature and pressure the Youngs
modulus of this material is 7.1 GPa and its Pois
Fig. 2. Example of dilatational response under
cyclic slow thermal loading.
sons coefcient is 0.335. Fig. 2 displays a typical result obtained with a linear dilatometer on
a 5550 mm sample submitted to 10C per
hour thermal cycles. The response is highly nonlinear and seemingly correlated with the glass transition estimated at 104C for this heating-cooling
rate. In the glassy regime around room temperature the volumetric thermal expansion coefcient
is 1.62104 K1 which is almost half that of the
TATB single crystal5. Strong local self-balanced
stresses must develop upon heating to counterbalance thermal strains. Upon reaching the glass transition the rubbery binder is likely to deform easily hence releasing internal stresses no more hindering thermal expansion. The volumetric thermal
expansion coefcient above the glass transition is
3.1104 K1 slightly higher than that of the crystal.
Virtual microstructure generation
As optical microscopy provides quite complex
pictures see Fig. 1 a large SEM image is taken
on a polished sample after etching the surface by a
suitable solvent of the binder to reveal grain boundaries. This image is then binarized and segmented
as illustrated in Fig. 3.
As is often done to approximate polycrystalline
microstructures a 3D space tessellation model will
be sought6 and its parameters will be identied by
matching the 2D grain-size distribution measured
in Fig. 3. The simplest one namely the Poisson
1258
Fig. 3. Segmented image displaying the polycrystalline microstructure.
Voronoi tessellation considers a Poisson distribution of seeds. The seeds appear simultaneously
and all grains grow from these seeds at the same
isotropic growth rate. Any grain labeled k is dened
as the set of voxels x for which
dx ck  dx cj j cid54 k
where dx cn is the Euclidean distance between x
and the seed of grain n. This model has only one
parameter namely the intensity of the Poisson process i.e.
the statistical average density of seeds
per unit volume. For a given value of this parameter a tessellation is generated from which 2D cuts
are selected and grain size distributions are determined by morphological opening. The difference
between such 2D grain size distributions and the
one measured on the image of Fig. 3 is then minimized by varying the parameter of the model. The
result displayed in Fig. 4 shows that the PoissonVoronoi model is unable to reproduce the 2D granulometry of the real material.
is therefore required.
The Johnson-Mehl7 one is characterized by a nonsimultaneous nucleation process.
version nucleation times follow a Poisson process.
In order to obtain a model reproducing the experimental 2D grain size distribution the nucleation
Fig. 4. 2D grain size distributions. Black measured in Fig. 3. Light blue green red Voronoi
Johnson-Mehl and modied Johnson-Mehl models
process must be further rened by making the nucleation rate to increase linearly with time. An
example of generated microstructure is given in
Fig. 5. Notice that the Johnson-Mehl tessellation
has the denitive advantage of providing curved
grain boundaries over the Voronoi one.
Thermoelastic behavior for constituents
The TATB crystal lattice is triclinic8 with two
molecules per unit cell. The unit cell parameters
are a  9.01 A b  9.028 A c  6.812 A  
108.59   91.82 and   119.97. The crystal
is made of a b plane layers of hydrogen-bonded
TATB molecules stacked together by weaker van
Bedrov et al9 have calculated its 21 independent
elastic constants at room temperature and pressure
using an atomistic approach. They are listed in Table 1 in a direct reference frame e1 e2 e3 such
that e1 is aligned with a and e2 lies in the a b
plane. The 6 components of the thermal expansion
tensor listed in Table 2 are computed in the same
reference frame from the X-ray diffraction data of
The grains will be assumed to be randomly oriented in the tessellation of Fig. 5. Each grain will
therefore be associated with a rotation tensor R
linking its crystallographic orientation to the xed
laboratory reference frame. Its elastic and thermal
expansion tensors are then expressed in the latter by
Table 2. Thermal expansion tensor components
computed from the data of Kolb et al.5 in K1
standard tensorial notations.
manding than the nite element method and requiring no meshing the FFT-based numerical scheme
is chosen. Its principle rst proposed by Moulinec
and Suquet10 for numerical homogenization under
periodic boundary conditions will only be outlined
For periodic homogenization it can be shown
that the macroscopic strain resp. stress is the spatial average of the microscopic strain resp. stress
eld. Therefore applying a macroscopic load is
equivalent to prescribing its spatial average and the
method consists in determining the local eld uctuations. Uniform temperature elds will be assumed in the sequel.
The problem statement is the following
ijx Cijklx klx  klxT 
where  is the stress tensor  the strain tensor u
the displacement vector and C and  are the elastic
and thermal expansion tensors dened in Tables 1
and 2 respectively. The set of equations 3 is complemented by periodic displacement uctuations or
anti-periodic traction uctuations boundary conditions.
This problem can be replaced by the equivalent
problem of a homogeneous elastic medium of stiffness tensor C0 submitted to the same boundary conditions but pre-loaded by a polarization stress
The solution of this problem is given by the
Lippman-Schwinger equation
in which G0 is the Green operator associated with
C0  is the non-uctuating part of the strain eld
Fig. 5. A 2D slice of the modied Johnson-Mehl
tessellation same scale as in Fig. 3.
Table 1. Elastic tensor components from Bedrov et
al.9 in GPa standard Voigt notations.
the following expressions
where upper case indices are relative to the xed
laboratory frame lower ones to the local crystallographic reference frame and RT
The FFT computational method
The homogenization tool developed here consists
in applying a macroscopic load to a volume element
representative of the studied microstructure computing the local thermomechanical elds and deriving the overall response. Being relatively less de
1260
macroscopic strain tensor and the symbol cid63 stands
for the convolution product.
This implicit equation is solved iteratively using the high convergence rate scheme proposed by
Eyre and Milton11 adapted to the thermoelastic
case. The strain eld is initialized to the macroscopic value. The stress eld is then computed using Eqn. 33 as well as polarization stresses using
Eqn. 4. Eqn. 5 is then evaluated in the Fourier
space which has the advantage of transforming the
convolution product into a simple algebraic product
and yields a new evaluation of the strain eld. This
recursive loop ends up when the strain eld attains
a stationary value within a prescribed accuracy.
The rst aim of the method is to predict linear
thermoelastic macroscopic properties.This is done
by performing 7 computations each one prescribing
independent applied macroscopic strains and temperature. The elastic moduli and the components of
the thermal expansion tensor are then calculated by
averaging over the stress tensor elds.
However these macroscopic moduli are necessarily evaluated on nite volumes and are therefore subject to statistical uctuations.
evaluate the size of the representative volume element RVE needed to achieve a reasonable accuracy for macroscopic moduli the computations are
performed on a relatively large volume of 10243
voxels about 12000 grains 8043 m3. The averaging procedure is then conducted on non overlapping sub-volumes of decreasing sizes. From these
data the statistical variance i.e.
the averages and thus of the macroscopic properties can be related to the size of the sub-volumes.
The predicted behavior is very nearly isotropic
as expected given the random nature of the microstructure and crystallographic orientations. For
the 10243 voxel volume we obtain a bulk modulus
of 17.20.1 GPa a shear modulus of 7.40.04 GPa
Youngs modulus 19.3 GPa Poissons coefcient
0.312 and a volumetric thermal expansion coefcient of 2.50104  0.06104 K1. It appears
clearly that the thermal expansion coefcient is less
accurately predicted than the elastic moduli.
Conversely it could be determined that an accuracy of 0.1 on the bulk and the shear moduli needs
a representative volume element of 2.53 mm3 about
38000 grains 32503 voxels and of 6.23 mm3 for
the thermal expansion coefcient. As a rule it was
shown that the linear size of the representative volume element must be increased by a factor 4.6 to
increase the accuracy of the macroscopic properties
by an order of magnitude.
Local eld uctuations are illustrated by Figs. 6
and 7. In Fig. 6 a macroscopic temperature increase
of 1 K is prescribed all macroscopic strains being
kept to zero. Therefore Fig. 6 displays the local
Longitudinal strains uctuate strongly.
zero strains are prescribed stresses must be predominantly compressive. Despite this tensile in
blue strains develop. Very strong gradients are also
noticed at most grain boundaries suggesting that
debonding might occur for sufcient thermal loading.
Fig. 6. Longitudinal strain eld 11. Applied
strain ij  0 applied temp. increase T  1 K.
Min. blue -5.0105. Max. red 4.7105.
The 1 direction is vertical on the map.
In Fig. 7 a macroscopic longitudinal strain of
1 is prescribed while maintaining the temperature
constant. Therefore Fig. 7 displays the local strain
elds normalized with respect to the applied strain.
Longitudinal strains also uctuate strongly. Val
1261
ues as high as three times the mean strain are
In this case intra-granular uctuations
are larger than for thermal loading while strain gradients appear somewhat weaker at grain boundaries.
This might suggest intra-granular cracking rather
than debonding under mechanical loads.
Fig. 7. Longitudinal strain eld 11. Applied longitudinal strain 11  1 other components are zero
applied temp. increase T  0. Min. blue 0.09.
Max. red 2.96. The 1 direction is vertical on the
The macroscopic elastic properties predicted for
the polycrystal are quite far from actual values measured on the real material. Schapery12 has given
theoretical bounds for the volumetric thermal expansion coefcient of polycrystals Fig. 8. It appears that the value predicted by FFT computations
lies within the bounds. This suggests that the computational method is not defective and that the origin of overestimations has to be sought elsewhere.
Fig. 2 shows that the volumetric thermal expansion coefcient
increases dramatically above
the glass transition temperature suggesting that
the binder plays a strong role on internal stresses
buildup and ultimately on the value of the volumetric thermal expansion coefcient. In order to evalu
Fig. 8. Schapery12 theoretical bounds for the volumetric thermal expansion coefcient of the polycrystal. The vertical lines are Hills bounds13 for
ate the potential role of the binder the grain boundaries were replaced by a 4 voxel wide interphase
with isotropic thermoelastic properties Youngs
modulus 1.77 GPa Poissons coefcient 0.32
volumetric thermal expansion coefcient 0. The
real binder properties being unknown at present
these properties are chosen to be of the magnitude
order of that of usual amorphous polymers with
comparable glass transition temperature.
The role of the binder is illustrated in Fig. 9 to be
compared to that of Fig. 6 relative to the case without binder. A more quantitative insight is provided
by the eld histograms given in Fig. 10. Globally
stresses are higher in the crystals than in the binder.
This is especially true for the mean stress average
approximately twice as high in the crystals than in
The computations yield again an isotropic macroscopic response with a Youngs modulus of 8.46
GPa a bulk modulus of 7.93 GPa and a volumetric thermal expansion coefcient of 2.4104 K1.
Despite the crudeness of this computation it appears clearly that the binder plays a strong softening
role on the macroscopic elastic properties not so far
from experimental data which is promising. However its effect on the thermal expansion coefcient
is only marginal. This is not understood at present.
Fig. 8 shows that for the polycrystal i.e. neglecting the binder the volumetric thermal expansion
Fig. 9. Longitudinal strain eld 11 in polycrystal
with binder. Applied thermal loading T  1
applied strain ij  0. Min. blue 8.7  104.
Max. red 2.0  104. The 1 direction is vertical
coefcient is quite sensitive to the value of the bulk
modulus. To match the measured value the bulk
modulus should lie slightly above 20 GPa which
suggests that the elastic constants used in this work
are somewhat underestimated.
In the recent experimental work of Stevens et
al14 the pressure-volume response of TATB powder
is measured using a diamond anvil-cell apparatus
coupled with X-ray diffraction to record the evolutions of the triclinic unit-cell volume with pressure
up to 13 GPa.The authors indicate a room pressure
bulk modulus above 15 GPa for the TATB single
crystal whereas the data of Bedrov et al.9 used here
yield a bulk modulus below 12 GPa. Also notice the
work of Valenzano et al.15 who obtained a partial
set of elastic constants for the TATB crysta by an
atomistic approach. They indicate a value of C11
one of the main contributions to the bulk modulus
20 higher than that of Bedrov et al9. It is therefore
possible that the values used here for the elastic constants are the main source of inaccuracies. Besides
notice that neither porosity nor microcracks are accounted for in the present state of modeling.
Fig. 10. Mean and equivalent stress histograms related to Fig. 9. Each histogram is normalized such
 P tdt  1. Blue in the binder red in
Conclusion and future work
The work presented here has demonstrated that it
is possible to build a numerical upscaling tool with
a detailed though not yet fully realistic description
of the microstructure. The rst results have shown
that input data are of the utmost importance especially the anisotropic elastic constants for the TATB
The next tasks will be to improve the virtual
microstructure model which should incorporate
the elongated character of the grains their sometimes strongly non-convex forms and ultimately
the presence of vestigial prills.
The behavior of the binder is being characterized
at present at least in the glassy domain i.e. below the glass transition temperature. An elasticplastic constitutive model will be incorporated in
the method. Besides it is planned to perform realtime observations at the microstructure level during
a quasi-static compression experiment in order to
get data for validation purposes.
Future work should extend the method by accounting for grain microcracking and plasticity and
for grain-binder debonding in order to evaluate the
effects of each potential mesoscale irreversible phenomena on the macroscopic quasi-static response
9. Bedrov D. Borodin O. Smith G. D. Sewell
T. D. Dattelbaum D. M. and Stevens L. L. A
molecular dynamics simulation study of crystalline 135-triamino-246-trinitrobenzene as a
function of pressure and temperature. J. Chem.
Phys. Vol. 131 p. 224703 2009.
10. Moulinec H. and Suquet P. A fast numericalmethod for computing the linear and nonlinear
mechanical properties of the composites. C. R.
Acad. Sci. Vol. II 318 pp. 14171423 1994.
11. Eyre D. and Milton G. A fast numerical
scheme for computing the response of composites using grid renement. Eur. J. Appl. Phys.
Vol. 6 pp. 4147 1999.
12. Schapery R. A. Thermal expansion coefcients of composites materials based on energy
principles. Comp. Mat. Vol. 2 pp. 380404
13. Hill R. The elastic behaviour of a crystalline
aggregate. Proc. Phys. Soc. Vol. A65 pp.
14. Stevens L. L. Velisavljevic N. Hooks D. E.
and Dattelbaum D. M. Hydrostatic Compression Curve for Triamino-Trinitrobenzene
Determined to 13.0 GPa with Powder X-Ray
Diffraction. Prop. Expl. Pyrotech. Vol. 33 pp.
15. Valenzano L. Slough W. J. and Perger W.
Accurate prediction of second-order elastic
constants from rst principles PETN and
TATB. AIP Conf. Proc. Vol. 1426 pp. 1191The Mesoscale Evolution of Voids in HMX-based Explosives During Heating 
Through the - Phase Transition 
Trevor M. Willey Lisa Lauderbach Franco Gagliardi Tony van Buuren 
Libby Glascoe Joe Tringe Jonathan R. I. Lee and Keo Springer  
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94550 
Argonne National Laboratory Argonne IL  
HMX-based explosives were heated through the - phase transition.  Ultra-small angle 
scattering recorded as the HMX was heated indicate how the void volume and mesoscale 
structure of the explosive changes due to the phase transition.  Molecular diffraction was 
simultaneously recorded to ascertain the phase of the HMX during the heating cycle.  Xray  microtomography  performed  before  and  after  heating  shows  the  character  of 
extensive microstructural damage at longer length scales caused by the temperature cycle 
and solid-state phase transition.  
transition  exhibit 
HMX-based explosives heated through the - 
increased  sensitivity.  
HMX-based explosives also cook-off at elevated 
temperatures  above  this  phase  transition  when 
self-heating  from  exothermic  reactions  leads  to 
deflagration and even detonation.  The sensitivity 
is qualitatively attributed to two factors the lower 
thermal  stability  of  the  -phase1  as  well  as 
increased  hot  spots2  and  initiation  centers  from 
voids  and  porosity  created  during  the  phase 
transition.  Quantification of how mesoscale 10 
nm  to  1  m  voids  affect  sensitivity  requires 
experimental measurement of such porosity during 
to  address  open  questions  regarding 
physiochemical  processes 
Inhomogeneities  in  electron  density  give  rise 
to  small  angle  scattering.    Small  angle  X-ray 
inhomogeneities with dimensions between  1 nm 
and 5 m and as such is ideally suited to studying 
the  size  and  size  dispersion  of  voids  in  high 
explosives.  A  comprehensive  treatment  of  the 
theoretical  basis  for  obtaining  this  information 
from a scattering profile lies beyond the scope of 
this  paper  and  can  be  found  elsewhere  in  the 
literature3.    Nonetheless  we  present  a  brief 
overview  of  the  key  processes  and  equations  that 
define the scattering profile. 
In its simplest form the scattered intensity is 
scattering length density r 
wavelength  of  scattered  radiation  and    is  the 
scattering  half  angle.  The  scattering  density  in  a 
unit cell can be represented by a scattering density 
function  ur  the  spatial  distribution  of  the 
scattering  sights  is  given  by  zr.  The  total 
scattering length density is a convolution of these 
two  terms  r  ur zr.  This  leads  to  the 
scattering  intensity  Iq f qSq  where f q 
the  general  scattering  form  factor  arises  from 
ur and the structure factor  Sq comes from 
zr.  Assuming  dilute  voids  with  uncorrelated 
positions and random orientation  Sq is constant 
equal to unity and the scattering is only a function 
this  approximation 
scattering can be written in the following form 
In  Eq.  2  s   is  the  size  of  the  scattering 
particle    is  the  scattering  contrast  related  to 
the  difference  in  electron  density  between  the 
scatterer  and  its  surroundings  Fqs  is  the 
scattering form  factor  Vs  is  the volume  of the 
particle  N   is  the  total  number  of  particles  and 
Ps is the probability of having a scatterer of size 
s the scattering size distribution function. 
Although  r gives a unique scattering 
Therefore  eq.  2  must  be  used  to  generate  the 
scattering  based  on  an  assumed  form  factor  and 
size  distribution  of  particles.  For  this  study  for 
simplicity  and  to  ascertain  approximate  sizes  for 
scatterers  the  voids  were  modeled  using  a  form 
factor  for  spheres.  Furthermore  we  assumed  that 
the voids were randomly and uniformly dispersed 
throughout the explosive. 
quantify  mesoscale 
USAXSSAXS  on  an  HMX-based  explosive 
known  as  LX-10  95  HMX  5  Viton.  The 
samples  were  pressed  between  0.7  and  0.8  mm 
thick and subsequently laser-cut to about 2.0 mm 
in diameter leading to sample masses of about 10 
mg.    A  Linkam  THMS600  modified  for  x-ray 
scattering  was  used  to  heat  and  control  the 
temperature  of  the  explosive.    The  experiments 
were  performed  at  15-ID-D  at  the  Advanced 
Photon  Source  at  Argonne  National  Laboratory 
using  the  upgraded  USAXS  instrument4.    Data 
were  analyzed  using  the  Irena  and  Indra  SAXS 
measurements  during  heating  contrast  previous 
studies that acquired SAXS after returning HMXbased  samples  to  ambient  temperatures6  7.  Xray  computed tomography  performed  at  beamline 
8.3.2 at the Advanced Light Source was also used 
Figure 1  Top Temperature of the sample in time 
USAXS and SAXS profiles were acquired at each 
temperature a-i.  Each acquisition illuminated a 0.4 x 
0.4 mm area on the sample a fresh point used for 
each acquisition as indicated in the diagram.  Right 
Molecular diffraction of HMX in LX-10 as observed in 
the largest scattering angles acquired.  Colors 
correspond to acquisitions in Fig. 2. 
Figure 2  Ultra-small angle x-ray scattering USAXS from LX-10 during heating left and rudimentary 
void volume distributions derived directly from the USAXS. 
Results and Discussion 
 The  temperature  profile  used  in  these 
studies  and  beam  positions  on  the  sample  are 
depicted  in  Figure  1.    Sample  temperature  was 
held  constant  during  USAXS  and  SAXS 
acquisitions and ramped between scans at the rate 
  Concurrent  to  mesoscale  porosity 
measurements  in  the  USAXS  the  SAXS  with 
sufficiently  high  scattering  angle  monitors  the 
phase  of  the  HMX  in  LX-10  through  molecular 
diffraction  peaks.  Although  peak  intensities  may 
vary  as  HMX  crystallites  have  varying  average 
orientations  in  each  sample  point  the  diffraction 
shows  the  solid-solid  -  phase  transition8  9 
occurs  between  acquisitions  e  and  f  as  the 
temperature is ramped from 175 to 200C.  Further 
the explosive remains in the  phase when cooled 
back to room temperature during this cycle . 
Figure  2  presents  the  USAXS  left  and 
USAXS-derived  void  volume  distributions5 
right.  Three acquisitions at positions a f and i 
Fig. 1 at temperatures of 25C 200C and 25C are 
presented for clarity.  Care was taken to quantify 
and avoid x-ray induced changes to the scattering 
we  noted  increased  sensitivity  to  such  damage  at 
temperatures  manifest  as  additional 
scattering intensity at the highest scattering angles 
measured when we scanned multiple times in rapid 
succession.  The increased intensity at around 10-1 
-1  is  likely  due  to  nascent  beam  damage  in  this 
scan.    The  USAXS  sensitive  to  scattering  from 
objects  or  voids  10  nm  to  5  um  shows 
relatively  stable  LX-10  mesoscale  structure  upon 
heating  from  25C  to  about  175C.    A  dramatic 
scattering  change  occurs  promptly  with  the  - 
phase  transition.    Scattering  is  greater  throughout 
the entire q-range in all scans after the transition as 
depicted  in  200C  and  later  25C  -  phases 
particularly  at  low  10-4  and  high  10-1  -1  qranges. 
  This  increased  scattering  implies  a 
dramatic  increase  in  void  volume  within  the 
material.  USAXS-derived void volume5 starts at 
1.3 hits 7 at 200C and increases to 8 after 
cooling  back  to  25C.  The  void  increases  are 
slightly larger but comparable to measured density 
changes  in  similar  explosives  undergoing  the 
phase change10.  The power law slope at 5x10-3 
-1  is  most  shallow  prior  to  heating  -3.7  while 
heated  samples  are  slightly  higher  and  post  - 
phase  transition  scattering  profiles  approach  -4.  
While  this  slope  does  not  unambiguously  give 
morphology  information  the  -3.7  does  indicate 
that  the  low-q  scattering  centers  in  as  pressed 
samples either possess surface texture have 2D or 
1D morphological characteristics or have a broad 
size  distribution  extending  towards  smaller  sizes.  
The  power  law  between  10-4    and  10-4  -1 
steepens with heating and approaches -4 with the 
scattering dimension has been reached often a -4 
scattering  from  near  spherical  objects  at  the 
associated  sizes.    Here  the  spherical  particle  fit 
two  narrower  peaks 
the  -  phase  transition  with  a  large  increase  in 
this  case  from  1.3  to  7  in  mostly  micronscale  porosity. 
quantifying  how  the  -  phase  change  damages 
HMX  crystallites  and  how  new  porosity  affects 
the  sensitivity  of  HMX  at  elevated  temperatures 
changes that are due to the phase transition.   
quantitative  mesoscale 
  The  authors  thank  I.  Tran  LLNL  for 
assistance  during  USAXS  experiments  and  D. 
Parkinson  ALS  LBNL  for  assistance  during 
tomography  experiments. 
  This  research  was 
partially  supported  by 
the  Joint  DoD-DOE 
Munitions  Technology  Development  Program.  
This work was performed under the auspices of the 
U.S.  Department  of  Energy  by  Lawrence 
Livermore  National  Laboratory  under  Contract 
DE-AC52-07NA27344.    ChemMatCARS  Sector 
the  National  Science 
FoundationDepartment  of  Energy  under  grant 
number NSFCHE-1346572.  Use of the Advanced 
Photon Source an Office of Science User Facility 
operated  for  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy 
DOE  Office  of  Science  by  Argonne  National 
Laboratory was supported by the U.S. DOE under 
Contract  No.  DE-AC02-06CH11357. 
Advanced  Light  Source  is  supported  by  the 
Director  Office  of  Science  Office  of  Basic 
Energy  Sciences  of  the  U.S.  Department  of 
under  Contract  No.  DE-AC0205CH11231.  LLNL-PROC-656399.   Comparative Analysis of Defect-Induced Effects on Thermal Stability of  
- and -HMX First Principles Modeling 
Maija M. Kuklja Roman Tsyshevsky and Onise Sharia  
Materials Science and Engineering Department University of Maryland College Park MD 20742 
Abstract. A density functional theory study of the interplay of chemical decomposition 
processes molecular and crystalline polymorphism and morphology of HMX crystals is 
reported. We investigated most plausible decomposition reactions in - and -phases of 
HMX  including  the  N-NO2  homolysis  the  concerted  elimination  of  nitrous  acid 
HONO and the HMX ring opening among others. All reactions were simulated in the 
isolated molecules ion radicals ideal bulk crystals and crystal surfaces. Our calculations 
revealed that the surface decomposition reactions of -HMX are significantly accelerated 
in comparison to bulk and gas phase which was not observed for -HMX. On the basis of 
the  obtained  results  we  propose  a  detailed  mechanism  of  the  initiation  of  the  thermal 
decomposition of HMX and offer an explanation for the dramatically increased sensitivity 
of the -phase. All results are presented in the context of available experiments.  
Sensitivity to initiation of detonation depends 
composition  bonding  of 
distribution  of  the  charge  density  stoichiometry 
molecular  ordering  grain  sizes  the  presence  of 
imperfections  nanoparticles 
Correlations  between  the  structure  composition 
and sensitivity however have yet to be established. 
Octahydro-tetranitro-tetrazocine 
widely  known  as    HMX  is  one  of  the  most 
important  solid  energetic  materials  with  multiple 
applications  ranging  from  high-explosives  and 
propellants  to  rocket  and  space  shuttle  engine 
fuels.  HMX  has  four  known  crystallographic 
phases  labeled  2  3  4  and  5.  At  ambient 
conditions it crystallizes and is typically produced 
transforms to the most reactive hexagonal -phase 
under  heating  at  T160C678910  which 
the  most  stable  monoclinic  -phase. 
accompanied by major changes of both the HMX 
configurations67 Fig. 1 and Fig. 2.  
It is well established that the -phase exhibits 
much  higher  sensitivity  to  detonation  initiation 
than  the  -phase.  Significant  differences  between 
the two phases were also noted in burn rates and 
drop  height  measurement  experiments.  It  was 
speculated that the observed sensitivity increase of 
the -phase is due to a density reduction from 1.90 
of the -phase to 1.79 gcm3 of the -phase and the 
corresponding  lattice  expansion  that  accompanies 
the beta-to-delta phase transition which results in 
an appearance of cracks large amount of hot spots 
in  the  material  and  the  fast  growth  of  reaction 
during shock compression11. 
Typically energetic and kinetic parameters of 
decomposition of energetic materials are scattered 
because  several  dissociation  processes  co-exists 
and only global kinetics is measured12. 
Fig. 1.  The structure of -HMX.  
However  activation  energies  of  condensed  HMX 
decomposition  are  scattered in  an unusually  wide 
range  from  13  to  67  kcalmol  with  narrower 
intervals assigned to decomposition in melt 47.164.7 kcalmol and in the gaseous phase 32.1-52.9 
kcalmol13. Judging by the described conditions of 
experiments these data are mostly relevant to the 
-HMX  phase.  Experimental  measurements  of  HMX  thermal  decomposition  are  largely  lacking 
with an exception of two studies14 that reported the 
activation  barrier  of  34.4  kcalmol  and  the  preexponential factor of log A15.3 s-1. With many 
experimental reports declaring a high sensitivity of 
the  phase atomistic theoretical investigations are 
scarce and the detailed reasons behind the HMX 
behavior remain puzzling. 
An  apparent  discrepancy  of  the  reported 
energy  barriers  obtained  for  -  and  -HMX 
provokes  quite  a  few  questions  regarding  a 
detailed  mechanism  of  HMX  decomposition  and 
the  consequence  of  its  steps.  Why  -HMX  is  the 
most stable and -HMX is the most reactive? What 
explosive -phase in comparison to the more stable 
-phase?  What  are  mechanisms  of  initiation  of 
chemistry in HMX containing defects?  
rapid  decomposition  of 
In this study we performed density functional 
theory  calculations  to  explore  the  interplay  of 
chemical  decomposition  and  stability  processes 
molecular  and  crystalline  polymorphism  and 
morphology of HMX crystals.  
We investigated most plausible decomposition 
reactions  in  -  and  -phases  of  HMX  including 
the N-NO2 homolysis the concerted elimination of 
nitrous acid HONO and the HMX ring opening. 
All  reactions  were  simulated  in  the  isolated 
molecules the ideal bulk crystals and the crystals 
containing defects surfaces vacancies and voids. 
Fig. 2.  The structure of -HMX. 
Our  calculations1516171819  revealed  that  the 
surface  decomposition  reactions  of  -HMX  are 
significantly accelerated in comparison to those of 
-HMX.  Based  on  obtained  results  we  propose  a 
detailed mechanism of the initiation of the thermal 
decomposition of -HMX and offer an explanation 
for the high sensitivity of the -phase. All results 
the  context  of  available 
Calculations  were  performed  using 
combination  of  density  functional  theory  DFT 
variational  transition  state  theory  TST  and  ab 
initio chemical kinetics with large-scale quantumchemical  molecular  and  periodic  solid-state 
ideal  and  defect  containing 
Chemical  reactions  in  the  gas-phase  were 
modeled  using  DFT  in  the  General  Gradient 
Approximation  GGA  with  the  Perdew-BurkeErnzerhof  PBE  functional  hybrid  exchange 
correlation-corrected  PBE0 
dispersion-corrected  wB97XD 
implemented in the molecular GAUSSIAN code20. 
structure  and  decomposition 
pathways  of  molecular  ions  of  -HMX  were 
modeled  using  PBE  and 
functional.  All  molecular  calculations  were 
performed  using  the  split-valence  double-zeta  631G2dfp basis set. 
performed  using  the  GGA  PBE  functional  and 
Projected  Augmented  Wave 
PAW  pseudopotentials  as  implemented  in  the  plane  wave 
VASP code212223. The kinetic energy cut-off was 
determined  as  a  result  of 
convergence  test  and  set  to  600  eV.  Surface 
reactions  were  simulated  by  using  a  slab  model 
containing  two  symmetric  lattice  fragments  each 
consisting  of  four-molecule-thick  001  surface 
layers on top of 10  of vacuum. One fragment in 
the  slab  is  a  mirror  reflection  of  the  other 
supercell  with  zero  total  dipole  moment  was 
purposely built to remove an artificial electric field 
in the vacuum layer. 
Pre-exponential  factors  were  calculated  with 
decomposition  reactions  that  proceed  through  a 
formation of a transition state and with variational 
transition  state  theory  for  the  homolytic  cleavage 
pathways as detailed elsewere121819.  
Modeling Decomposition Reactions 
Decomposing Molecules 
Calculated  activation  barriers  reaction  rates 
and pre-exponential factors Table 1 show that the 
homolytic  cleavage  of  N-NO2  bond  in  -HMX 
the  predominant  decomposition 
pathway in the gas phase. 
A  careful  comparison  of  the  results  described  in 
decomposition of - and - HMX conformers leads 
us to conclude that the modifications of the HMX 
molecular  structure  from  the  boat  to  the  chair 
configurations  do  not  crucially  affect  the  N-NO2 
bond  strength  and  the  activation  barrier  of  the 
decomposition  of  the  ground  state  molecules. 
intramolecular  interactions  play  a  minor  role  in  the 
to  detonation.  The 
sensitivity  of  materials 
chemical  composition  and 
chemical  functional  groups  such  as  nitro  group 
amino group etc. are important factors but mutual 
positions of those groups relative to each other are 
of a significantly lesser importance as illustrated in 
this  example.  Therefore 
sensitivities of the - and -HMX phases cannot be 
interactions contrary to earlier predictions67. 
these  conclusions  suggest 
Table  1.  Activation  barriers  E  kcalmol  zeropoint  corrected  barriers  EZPE  kcalmol  reaction 
in  parentheses  and  preenergies 
logA  s-1  of  -HMX 
decomposition reactions of isolated molecules. 
Extrapolating to other explosive materials we 
reiterate  that  while  molecular  calculations  give 
valuable insight on decomposition mechanisms in 
the gas phase it is inappropriate to speculate about 
the sensitivity to detonation initiation of materials 
and even chemical reactivity in general  by using 
results  of  molecular  modeling  alone.  Solid-state 
simulations  are  critical 
understanding  of  micro-scale  mechanisms  of 
Decomposing Ideal Bulk Crystals 
Our calculations of decomposition of the ideal 
bulk  -HMX  crystals  confirmed  the  tendencies 
observed on the neutral molecules Table 2. The 
-HMX  molecule  and  the  molecular  crystal  are 
neutral  hence  they  exhibit  similar  behavior  with 
the already well-known trend24 of showing visibly 
higher  activation  barriers  and  somewhat  longer 
reaction  times  in  the  condensed  phase  relative  to 
We also note here that the kinetic parameters 
obtained here for -HMX reaffirm kinetics known 
for -HMX and therefore do not offer any logical 
explanation for differences in sensitivities of those 
Table  2.  Activation  barriers  E  kcalmol  and 
reaction  energies  in parentheses of -HMX  gas 
phase and solid-state phase decomposition. 
Gas phase  Bulk crystal 
First we simulated processes of ionization of 
the  -HMX  molecule  Fig.  3  and  electron 
attachment  by  the  molecule  Fig.  4.  The  ion 
radical  decomposition  calculations  show  that  the 
positively and negatively charged ions of -HMX 
detachment  of  the  NO2  moiety  than  the  neutral 
molecules. This means that both an electron-rich 
Table  3.  Activation  barriers  E  kcalmol  and 
reaction  energies  given  in  parentheses  of  HMX ion radical decomposition. 
and electron-deficient environments of the -HMX 
the  decomposition  process.  The 
ionization  potential  is  rather  high  and  therefore 
some  additional  energy  is  required  to  form  the 
cation.  However  once  the  cation  is  formed  very 
little  additional  energy  is  required  to  breakdown 
the system and the reaction becomes autocatalytic 
due  to  high  exothermicity.  With  the  trend  of  the 
molecule  to  quickly  trap  an  electron  due  to  its 
positive  electron  affinity  a  large  reduction  of 
activation  barriers  was  observed  for  -HMX 
radical  anion  with  a  clear  trend  to  favor  the  NO2 
loss  mechanism  at  expense  of  other  possible 
channels  which  become  suppressed.  Naturally 
such  a  dramatic  energy  reduction  also  affects 
reaction  rates  so  the  decomposition  of  ions 
proceeds  at  significantly  higher  rates  than  the 
decomposition of the neutral molecule Fig. 7. 
Fig. 3.  The ionization of -HMX. 
Fig. 5.  Decomposition of ionized -HMX. 
Fig. 4.  The electron attachment of -HMX. 
Fig. 6.  Decomposition of negative ion of -HMX. 
Most  importantly  excess  of  electrons  or  holes 
decomposition  of  -HMX  radical  ions  and  hence 
improved explosive sensors and ignition devices.  
Fig. 7. Reaction rates of -HMX decomposition. 
Decomposing Surfaces 
Here  we  show  that  the  dipole  moment  of 
polar  -HMX  generates  a  surface  charge  and 
catalyzes  the  explosive  decomposition.  Projected 
density  of  states  and  Bader  charges  indicate  that 
the  electric  field  generated  by  the  molecular 
dipoles of -HMX on the 001 surface induces a 
charge transfer such as the positive surface has 
excess  of  a  positive  charge  and  the  negative 
surface  has  excess  of  a  negative  charge.  This 
means that the surface is polar and charged.  
Next  we  simulated  the  cleavage  of  the  axial 
reactions  on  positively  and  negatively  charged 
001  surfaces  Table  4  Fig.  8.  The  reaction 
energy obtained from a sum of the total energies 
of  the  isolated  neutral  NO2  and  the  positively 
charged  CH2N-NO23-CH2N  residue  on  the 
001 surface is found to be -6.0 kcalmol. This is 
to  cation  decomposition 
Similarly to the molecular cation the CH2NNO23-CH2N  residue  on  the  positively  charged 
001  surface  relaxes  into  the  HONO  isomer. 
Bader  charges  confirm  that  the  hole  state  is 
completely localized on the axial HONO isomer.  
Fig. 8. Decomposition of 001 -HMX surface. 
Table  4.  Activation  barriers  E  kcalmol  and 
reaction  energies  given  in  parentheses  of  HMX surface decomposition. 
The  estimated  barrier  of  such  a  rearrangement  is 
20.7  kcalmol  also  comparable  to  the  cation 
13.0  kcalmol.  The  reaction  energy  of  the  axial 
HONO  isomer  formation  is  12.9  kcalmol  Table 
4  which  is  somewhat  higher  than  the  reaction 
energy  calculated  for  the  reaction  in  -HMX 
cation  1.6  kcalmol.  Thus  the  hole  trapped  on 
the polar -HMX surface has a pronounced effect 
the  material.  The  simulated 
endothermic  HONO-isomerization 
cation  decomposition.  The 
corresponding  activation  barriers  are  significantly 
reduced  relatively  to  the  neutral  crystal  bulk 
reaction and to the neutral gas-phase reaction.  
The  negatively  charged  001  surface  also 
bears  a  stronger  effect  on  the  axial  N-N  bond 
cleavage  pathway.  The  detachment  of  the  axial 
NO2  from  -HMX  requires  20.1  kcalmol  Table 
4 that is somewhat higher than the corresponding 
anion  reaction  estimate  9.0  kcalmol  and  lower 
by  25-30  kcalmol  than  the  energy  required  for 
the  reaction  in  the  gas  phase  and  bulk  material. 
Once  ZPE  corrections  would  further  reduce  the 
energy  by  another  5  kcalmol  reaching  15 
kcalmol. The extra electron precludes the surface 
elimination  channel  showing  the  discrimination 
parallel to the anion processes Table 4. 
than  32-35  kcalmol  obtained  for 
The obtained low activation barriers predict a 
high  sensitivity  of  -HMX  to  thermal  initiation. 
The  estimated  barriers  15-21  kcalmol  are  far 
sensitivity  benchmark  compound  PETN25  the 
most  sensitive  secondary  high  explosive  in  its 
class.  All  materials  that  exhibit  higher  sensitivity 
than  PETN  are  classified  as  primary  explosives. 
For  example  heavy  metal  azides  SrN6  CuN3 
PbN6 and AgN3 typical representatives of primary 
explosives  exhibit  barriers  of  20  27  29  and  32 
kcalmol  respectively26.  Thus  while  -HMX  is 
known to be a typical secondary explosive the polymorph is not.   
The  -HMX  crystals  exhibit  a  comparable 
behavior of both negatively and positively charged 
surfaces  with  the  decomposition  triggered  by  a 
relatively modest perturbation and proceeded very 
rapidly initiating a violent explosive reaction.  
polarization-induced 
The  obtained  here  conclusions  have  vast 
consequences. First of all a logical explanation of 
differences  in  sensitivity  of  -HMX  and  -HMX 
phases  to  initiation  of  detonation  can  be  now 
Interactions  of  molecular  dipoles 
separation which prompts the polar surfaces of the 
-HMX  crystals  to  decompose  much  faster  than 
non-polar grains of the -HMX crystals. Second of 
all  a  wide  range  of  experimental  activation 
barriers reported for HMX is likely to be attributed 
to various crystallographic phases including both 
-  and  -HMX.  With  polar  -HMX  facets 
appreciably lower and -HMX facets  higher an 
unusually large scattering of activation barriers in 
the  overall  thermal  initiation  should  be  expected. 
The scattered energy interval in fact makes a lot 
of  sense  if  one  recalls  that  the  experimental  data 
e.g.  in  mass-spectroscopy  and  DSC  and  TGA 
measurements  strongly  depend  on  the  heating 
rate especially taking into account that the -to- 
phase  transitions  energy  also  falls  into  the  same 
range. In other words relative fractions of - and 
the  activation  energy  which 
-HMX phases in the decomposing material most 
likely  vary  in  experiments. Thus  a  lower end  of 
the reported interval 13 to 25-35 kcalmol which 
was  previously  regarded  as  erroneous  results13 
may  be  actually  associated  with  a  degradation  of 
the  polar  -HMX  surfaces. The  medium  range  of 
40-46  kcalmol  in  energy  is  rather  related  to 
decomposition  of  the  nonpolar  -phase  surfaces 
and  the  higher  energies  above  46  kcalmol  are 
probably  relevant  to  other  processes  or  systems 
components  for  example  evaporated  molecules 
plastic binders or other additives. Third of all the 
gained  understanding  reveals  a  clear  correlation 
the  presence  of  polar  surfaces  and 
decomposition  kinetics  which  can  be  used  to 
adjust sensitivity of the high explosive material to 
detonation  by  choosing  certain  crystallographic 
polymorphs.    Such  a  manipulation  by  materials 
composition and morphology makes it possible to 
fine  tune  the  surface  chemistry  for  targeted 
simulated  by  density  functional 
decomposing  molecules  were  placed  in  various 
environments  ranging  from  an  idealized  isolated 
molecule  or  an  ion  to  condensed  materials.  A 
comparative analysis included the single gas-phase 
neutral  molecules  in  their  ground  state  -HMX 
ionized  molecule  -HMX  negatively  charged 
ion -HMX and molecules placed in an ideal 
bulk crystal and on a 001 crystal surface.  
Fig.  9  summarizes  a  comparison  of  -HMX 
and  -HMX  decomposition  processes.  We  found 
that  the  molecular  decomposition  process  of  HMX and -HMX from its ground state are very 
similar.  The  decomposition  of  ion  radicals  of  HMX requires a notably smaller energy to trigger 
decomposition  than  the  neutral  molecule1215.  The 
reaction  parameters  of  the  major  decomposition 
pathways in ideal bulk crystals of -HMX and HMX were again fairly similar to each other and 
to their neutral molecular analogs. However they 
most  likely  do  not  define  the  sensitivity  of 
materials  to  detonation  because  first  reactions  do 
not  start  in  the  bulk  of  densely  packed  high 
the  presence  of  holes 
Finally  the  decomposition  pathways  of  HMX  and  -HMX  molecules  placed  on  surfaces 
are  appreciably  different12.  The  nonpolar  -HMX 
surface induces a small reduction of the activation 
interactions1617. Unlike -HMX the polar 001 HMX surface causes holes h and electrons e- 
to separate and the activation barrier of the surface 
reaction  to  decrease.    As  a  result  the  reaction  is 
triggered with a modest perturbation significantly 
smaller  than  that  required  to  ignite  -HMX.  We 
simultaneous decomposition via the NO2 loss and 
HONO-elimination  channels27.  The  presence  of 
suppresses  other  channels.  The  major  difference 
between  -HMX  and  -HMX  sensitivities  is 
defined  by  fundamental  differences  in  properties 
of chemically active polar -HMX surfaces versus 
relatively more passive nonpolar -HMX surfaces. 
We predict that the decomposition chemistry of HMX would also be facilitated in the presence of 
an additional charge however adding this charge 
to  the  system  will  require  an  additional  external 
energy. The polar 001 surfaces of -HMX create 
such  conditions  by  polarizing  surface  and 
separating holes and electrons which triggers fast 
chemistry and no additional energy is needed. 
Fig.  9.    Comparison  of  -HMX  and  -HMX 
decomposition trends. Thermochromic polymers as in-situ sensors for hot spots in explosive composites 
Joseph P. Hooper Brian P. Mason James R. Hemmer Sufian Alnemrat Madelynn Whittaker Simran 
Arora Sameh Helmy and Javier Read de Alaniz 
Department of Physics 
Naval Postgraduate School Monterey CA 93943 
Research Department 
Naval Surface Warfare Center Indian Head MD 20640 
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry 
University of California Santa Barbara CA 93106 
Abstract.  We  report  initial  work  on  a  thermochromic  photoswitch  that  can  respond  to 
localized temperature increases during fast loading of hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene 
HTPB  leaving  a  residual  fluorescent  signature  after  impact.  A  donor-acceptor 
Stenhouse  adduct  DASA  was  integrated  into  HTPB  and  found  to  thermally  activate 
during  high-rate  loading  converting  to  a  conjugated  colored  form  that  remains  for 
multiple  days  following  microsecond  compression  in  a  Hopkinson  bar.  Mesoscale 
fluorescent  mapping  of  recovered  fragments  provides  a  post-mortem  map  of  HTPB 
regions  that  reached  elevated  temperatures.  This  approach  may  offer  experimental 
validation of temperature localization in explosive composites without the need for highspeed diagnostics. 
localization in a polymerexplosive composites has 
been  a  long  standing  challenge  in  the  energetics 
community.  The  sizes  of  critical  hot  spots  are 
expected  to  be  on  the  submicron  scale  and 
dissipate  rapidly  following  a  transient  impact  or 
shock  event.1  While  ultrafast  diagnostics  hold 
promise for direct spectroscopy or imaging during 
integrate  into  pragmatic  macroscale  testing  on 
energetic materials.  
these  are  challenging 
Here we discuss our initial results on mapping 
hotspots  by  using  thermally  active  photoswitches 
embedded  in  the  polymer  matrix.  Though  the 
molecules  considered  here  are  all  photoswitches 
we  use  them  primarily  for  their  fast  thermal 
activation  visible  light  is  only  used  to  reconvert 
the  switch  to  its  original  state.  Our  desired 
photoswitch  molecules 
thermally  and  transition  to  a  form  with  some 
manner of spectroscopic signature ideally visible 
and remain in that form after an impact event. The 
molecular sensors thus leave a microscale snapshot 
of the maximum temperature state in the polymer 
matrix of an explosive composite. 
Our initial work focused on spiropyran based 
photoswitches that were responsive to temperature 
and  mechanical  stress  following  the  work  of 
Moore  and  Sottos.2-11  Previous  work  on  these 
systems had integrated spiropyrans at the center of 
long  polymer  chains  or  as  a  crosslinker.  Under 
quasistatic  tensile  stress  this  optically  yellow 
functional group undergoes a reversible C-O bond 
scission  to  a  merocyanine  form  that  is  red.  This 
technique holds great promise for localized stress 
mapping  in  polymers  and  composites  but  an 
additional  complication  arises  for  application  in 
explosives.  The  loading  rates  of  interest  for  hot 
spot  generation  are  typically  quite  high  and  in 
addition  to  rapid  stress  localization  there  will  be 
temperature  dissipation  that  does  not  occur  in 
quasistatic  loading.  We  have  found  that  the 
mechanically  active  were  also  thermally  active 
making  it  challenging  to  distinguish  the  two 
effects following rapid loading.  
integrated  spiropyrans 
spiropyran  photoswitch 
response  when  integrated  as  a  crosslinker  in 
polymethylmethacrylate  is  shown  in  Figure  1. 
The basic molecular configuration is shown in the 
top  frame  with  polymer  attachment  points  on 
either  side  of  the  critical  bond  between  the  spiro 
carbon and the oxygen. Three configurations were 
fabricated first a difunctional form DF-PMMA 
in which the polymer is attached as shown in the 
top  frame.  With  this  manner  of  attachment  the 
photoswitch  will  respond  to  mechanical  force  as 
well  as  temperature.  Second  we  integrated  the 
spiropyran  as  a  pendant  on  the  PMMA  chains 
monofunctional  or  MF-PMMA  this  renders  it 
it  retains  a  similar 
temperature  response  as  the  DF-PMMA  both 
activate rapidly near 80 C during slow heating in 
an  oven.  Finally  we  considered  a  difunctional 
control  form  in  which  two  polymer  attachment 
points  were  used  but  in  a  configuration  that  did 
not result in mechanical or thermal response. This 
form  activates  only  under  UV 
Figure 1 shows the response of each of these 
systems  to  heating  UV  exposure  and  high-rate 
impact  in  a  Hopkinson  bar.  During  fast  loading 
the  heat  dissipated  during  glassy  fracture  is 
sufficient  to  activate  the  photoswitch  in  localized 
areas. Examples of recovered fragments are given 
in  the  bottom  frame  of  the  Figure  1.  The 
similarities  between  the  MF-PMMA  and  DFPMMA 
overwhelms the mechanical activation and makes 
challenging.  Further  study  using  microscale 
analysis  of  the  local  fluorescence  on  fragments 
does  indicate  some  distinct  mechanical  activation 
may be occurring but this is a small portion of the 
overall response. Extended analysis of this system 
is discussed in Ref. 12. 
We have thus sought additional photoswitches 
that  respond  to  mechanical  force  or  temperature 
but not both. The latter is a more tractable goal and 
the one we discuss in this paper with a particular 
into  hydroxyl-terminated 
polybutadiene HTPB. The spiropyran conversion 
to the merocyanine form is generally disfavored in 
non-polar  environments  and  our  initial  testing 
showed  that  most  spiropyrans  variants  integrated 
into HTPB would decompose before switching to 
the  merocyanine  form.  We  have  thus  turned  to 
alternative  photoswitches  that  can  activate  at 
temperatures suitable for mesoscale diagnostics. 
Fig.  1  Summary  of  activation  of  a  spiropyran 
photoswitch integrated as a crosslinker or pendant 
into  PMMA.  The  mechanically  active  form  also 
making it challenging to separate mechanical and 
Here  we  focus  on  a  new  photochromic 
molecule  recently  synthesized  by  Read  de Alaniz 
and  coworkers.  The  system  termed  a  donoracceptor  Stenhouse  adduct  DASA  is  shown  in 
Figure 2. The closed colorless form is zwitterionic 
and  upon  heating  opens  to  a  conjugated  colored 
system. Sustained visible lights reconverts back to 
the  colorless  form.  Additional  information  on  the 
synthesis and properties of DASA can be found in 
Ref.  13.  The  integration  into  HTPB proceeded  in 
the following way. DASA 3 mg was dissolved in 
hydroxyl-terminated 
Mn2800 gmol Mw6200 gmol 6.0 g. This 
hexamethylene dissocyanate HMDI 0.5 mL and 
dibutyltin dilaurate 5 microliters then sealed in a 
10  mL  disposable  polyethylene  syringe  for  18 
hours.  The  resulting  elastomeric  polymer  was 
carefully cut out of the syringe. Samples were then 
cut  and  polished  to  submicron  flatness  with  an 
abrasive  film  mild  activation  of  the  photoswitch 
was  observed  during  the  polishing  process  but 
quickly reverted under visible light exposure. The 
homogeneous  HTPB  with  minimal  porosity  but 
examining  HTPBsugar 
Preliminary  results  show  similar  activation  of  the 
DASA when combined in a composite. 
Fig.  2  The  donor-acceptor  Stenhouse  adduct 
DASA  used  in  this  study  shown  in  active 
colored and inactive colorless states. 
The particular DASA form we have integrated 
into HTPB contains two octyl groups off the donor 
portion  of  the  molecule  see  Fig.  2  to  improve 
the  polymer.  The  photoswitch 
activates  readily  under  slow  heating  turning  a 
Temperature-dependent solid-state UV-Vis spectra 
are shown in Figure 4 during slow heating 1 C 
per  second  ramp  in  a  muffle  furnace  revealing 
strong  activation  in  the  range  110-120  C  as  the 
photoswitch  opens  to  the  conjugated  form  and 
begins absorbing at 540 nm. The UV-Vis spectra 
were taken by heating a 3mm thick 10 diameter 
disk and holding at each listed temperature for 20 
minutes before collecting the spectrum. At higher 
temperatures  an  additional  peak  appears  at  492 
nm likely related to thermal decomposition of the 
DASA.  Pure  HTPB  showed  no  traces  of  either 
absorption peak under heating. 
We note here that the proper way to model the 
degree of activation is a kinetic expression rather 
than  a  simple  temperature  of  activation.  The 
concentration of  active photoswitch  and  thus  the 
value  of  the  absorbance  will  depend  on  the 
temperature.  During 
Hopkinson  bar  impact  the  duration  of  each 
loading  pulse  is  on  the  order  of  100  s  and  we 
expect  the duration  of  elevated  temperature  to  be 
on a comparable scale. Currently we are finalizing 
a zeroth order Arrhenius expression describing the 
kinetics of DASA activation in HTPB. 
The  temperatures  considered  here  are  small 
compared  to  peak  hot  spot  temperatures  in  an 
explosive formulation1 and it is unlikely that any 
environment  of  a  true  hot  spot.  Rather  the  more 
appropriate  application  would  be  for  moderate 
velocity  impact  such  as  occurs  during  a  drop 
hammer or frag impact safety test.  
Figure  3  HTPBDASA  samples  before  and  after 
high-rate impact and uniform heating. The bottom 
frames show images from high-speed video during 
HTPB  compression  and  failure  in  the  Hopkinson 
performed  high-rate  compression  studies  on 
DASAHTPB  using  a  34  split  Hopkinson 
pressure  bar  with  no  stress-reversal  momentum 
trap.  Samples  were  loaded  repeatedly  at  rates  in 
excess of 1e3 s-1 during a single shot resulting in 
heavy  compression  and  heating.  Fragments  were 
recovered  post-mortem  from  a  collection  device 
around the Hopkinson bar and an example of the 
recovered  fragments  is  shown  in  Figure  3  along 
with  high-speed  images  during  the  compression. 
The  activation  is  highly  heterogeneous  and  is 
prominent mainly on the edge of small fragments. 
The  photoswitch  is  light-sensitive  and  after  1-2 
fluorescent  signature  on  the  small  fragments  will 
generally  disappear.  Thus  all 
performed  with  minimal 
immediately  to  the  spectrometers  for  analysis. 
Samples  kept  in  the  dark  following  impact  were 
observed  to  have  qualitatively  similar  activation 
features up to several weeks later. 
lighting  conditions 
Fig. 4 Temperature-dependent UV-Vis absorption 
the  solid  HTPBDASA  system  showing 
activation beginning at 110-120 C. 
indicator  we  mapped 
To  quantify  the  DASA  activation  beyond  a 
emission  on  the  surface  of  recovered  fragments 
using  a  confocal  Raman  microspectrometer 
coupled  to  an  optical  microscope  Renishaw 
inVia.  This  technique  provides  a  means  of 
capturing  fluorescence  variation  on  the  micron 
scale  in  a  quantitative  fashion.  A  514  nm  Ar-ion 
laser was used at a very low power density 200 
Wcm2  to  excite  the  DASA  sample  and  maps 
were  made  collecting  the  emission  as  the  sample 
was translated beneath the optics to form a spatial 
map.  Figure  5  shows  the  basic  emission  spectra 
from  a  single  point  on  the  sample  at  ambient 
conditions  with  the  DASA  closed  and  in  the 
activated  state  after  heating  at  120  C  for  30 
minutes. There is a distinct emission peak centered 
at 570 nm arising from the photoswitch. 
Fig.  5  Emission  spectra  at  a  point  on  an 
HTPBDASA  sample  showing  emergence  of  a 
broad  emission  centered  at  570  nm  following 
uniform heating at 120 C for 20 minutes. 
We then performed a number of maps before 
and after high-rate impact on prepared cylindrical 
samples  10  mm  in  diameter  and  5  cm  thick.  The 
mapping  is  performed  by  taking  rapid  scans  1  s 
collection  time  per  point  between  550  and  590 
nm and plotting an intensity map of the number of 
counts at 570 nm. A 20x objective was used on the 
spectrometer  which  provided  a 
resolution  while  allowing  large  portions  of  the 
sample to remain in focus. Fluorescent mapping of 
the HTPBDASA at ambient conditions showed no 
spatial variation and the mean background counts 
at  570  nm  was  approximately  75  with  a  typical 
standard  deviation  of  around  15  counts.  The 
emission  spectra  at  point  shown  in  Figure  5  was 
taken  with  longer  collection  times  and  hence 
shows  a  larger  variation  in  counts  for  pre-  and 
post-mortem  sample  mapping  all  conditions  were 
held constant to provide meaningful comparison of 
thermal activation following high-rate loading. 
Analysis  of  recovered  fragments  showed 
small  regions  of  intense  activation  orders  of 
magnitude  above  the  background.  In  many  cases 
these regions could be seen visually in an optical 
microscope. Figure 6 shows a typical example in 
which  the  surface  of  a  recovered  HTPBDASA 
fragment is shown along with a fluorescent map of 
570  nm  emission.  A  40  m  region  of  intense 
regions  which  are 
DASA emission is seen and the coloration can be 
seen  as  well  in  the  optical  picture.  These  small 
throughout  the  sample  are  not  believed  to  be 
agglomerates of the photoswitch. We performed a 
number  of  maps  on  unshot  heated  samples  at 
temperatures slightly below and above the nominal 
activation  temperature  120  C  and  observed  no 
such localization. These appear to be an artifact of 
the  cracking  and  failure  process  in  HTPB  during 
intense  compressive  loading.  The  high  solubility 
of the photoswitch and its molecular scale means 
that  the  limiting  factor  on  the  resolution  is  the 
optics  on  the  confocal  spectrometer  with  a 
technique  such  as  NSOM  in  principle  nanoscale 
resolution of the fluorescence could be obtained. 
Quasistatic  loading  has  no  effect  on  the 
photoswitch.  A  10  mm  diameter  10  mm  tall 
cylinder  of  HTPBDASA  was  compressed  to 
failure  in  an  Instron  load  frame  at  a  rate  of 
approximately  1e-4  s-1  until  widespread  sample 
failure. No sensor activation was observed in these 
samples as would be expected.  
Fig.  5  Representative  fluorescent  map  of  an 
HTPB fragment surface showing localized DASA 
following  high-rate 
In conclusion we have incorporated a donoracceptor Stenhouse adduct photoswitch into HTPB 
to  act  as  a  microscale  sensor  of 
temperature increases. This photoswitch integrates 
readily into the non-polar HTPB environment and 
switches thermally at to a conjugated state with a 
distinct  visible  fluorescent  signature.  Under  slow 
heating in a muffle furnace rapid activation of the 
DASA photoswitch was observed at temperatures 
of approximately 120 C. We performed high-rate 
impact  on  HTPBDASA 
compression  Hopkinson  bar  loading  the  samples 
resulting  fragments  for  analysis.  The  photoswitch 
microspectrometer  that  produced  mesoscale  maps 
of the 570 nm emission from activated DASA. In 
addition  to  visible  activation  on  small  fragments 
and failure surfaces these maps revealed localized 
regions of thermal activation on the micron scale. 
These  initial  results  indicate  that  the  Stenhouse 
adduct  is  a  promising  means  of  temperature 
in  HTPB  during  moderate  velocity 
impact additional synthesis efforts are ongoing to 
alter the activation temperature reversion kinetics 
in visible light and solubility in HTPB.  
This  work  was  funded  by  the  Defense  Threat 
Reduction Agency  Basic  Sciences  program  under 
grant number HDTRA139181 and managed by Su Shock Induced Ignition of Porous HMXComputational Examination of Hot-Spot
Keith A. Gonthier and Sunada Chakravarthy
Mechanical and Industrial Engineering Department Louisiana State University Baton Rouge LA 70803
Abstract. Experiments have shown that shock induced initiation of porous explosives is inuenced by the effective packing density and the size and shape of the particles. Characterizing ignition behind compaction shocks is important for describing the initiation and failure of detonation which establishes the materials sensitivity. The ignition time behind the
wave which represents the onset of measurable vigorous combustion due to growth and coalescence of reactive hot-spots is controlled by distributions in the intensity size and spatial proximity of hot-spots which depend on mesostructure and wave strength. Mesoscale
simulations of planar shock propagation in porous HMX are performed to characterize how
initial packing density affects the formation rate of reactive hot-spots by steady waves. It is
shown that the distribution of formation times relative to the wave is exponential which is
indicative of a time invariant Poisson process. The effective formation rate established by
the formation time distribution is related to wave strength using 1 an Arrhenius description that leads to a kinetic interpretation of reactive hot-spot formation and 2 a conventional
power law description in terms of wave pressure. A simple P n-type relation for the ignition induction time behind a wave is proposed based on a cumulative ignition function
that depends on mesostructure through the effective reactive hot-spot formation rate.
Porous solid explosives have a complex spatial structure at the pore scale referred to as the
mesostructure that can affect their shock loading
behavior. The mesostructure is inuenced by initial
particle size and shape distributions short and long
range inter-particle coordination particle packing
density and intra-particle defects such as cracks and
pores. A recent focus within the explosives community is to computationally examine the relationship
between mesostructure and shock induced ignition
and initiation. Advancements have been made in
computationally characterizing how mesostructure
affects thermodynamic states and hot-spots within
and behind deformation waves 1 2 3 4 but a comprehensive description of its effect on ignition and
initiation remains largely elusive.
To establish this relation it is necessary to characterize key attributes of the mesostructure that can
be correlated with its shock induced heating response. Techniques exist to rigorously characterize
the mesostructure in terms of various statistical descriptors 5 but is often described to leading-order
in terms of a materials effective packing density
and particle size and shape. Though these lowerorder descriptors have practical relevance they provide little quantiable statistical information on par
1285
Fig. 1. Initial mesostructures corresponding to a 0  0.68 and b 0  0.84. The average particle size
for each mesostructure is d  60 m.
ticle mixing and clustering that can signicantly affect hot-spot formation at present this information is typically inferred by informal inspection of
mesostructures and corresponding hot-spot elds.
As a preliminary step in examining the relation
between mesostructure and shock induced ignition
mesostructures used in this analysis are assumed
to be statistically homogeneous and isotropic so
that their descriptors are translationally and rotationally invariant. Consequently only a single realization of each mesostructure needs to be considered in the large volume limit to obtain comprehensive information on shock induced hot-spots.a Statistically homogeneous mesostructures are easy to
computationally generate but are exceptionally difcult to manufacture in practice. Statistical inhomogeneities inherent in manufactured materials will
produce stochastic variations in the shock induced
ignition response that must be analyzed by considering multiple material realizations. For tractability this analysis characterizes mesostructures solely
in terms of their initial packing density solid volume fraction 0 and mean particle size diameter
d with a narrow particle size distribution. The assumption of statistical homogeneity is reasonable
for these mesostructures because local variations in
the mean packing density and in the deviation of its
uctuations in the axial direction are small. This
preliminary analysis may be expanded in the future
to systematically examine the effects of disparate
particle sizes and statistical inhomogeneities on ig
aLong computational domains are used in this
study to emulate the large volume limit.
Shock induced ignition is described in this study
as consisting of two sequential processes 1 the
formation of thermally isolated reactive hot-spots
at the pore-scale followed by 2 the growth and
coalescence of reactive hot-spots that gives rise to
global ignition at the macro-scale. Because inert
simulations do not describe the multi-phase physics
leading to global ignition we focus on local ignition that is stochastic due to pore-scale variations
in mesostructure and infer information about the
global ignition time behind waves based on the formation rate of reactive hot-spots. To this end inert temperature eld predictions at the pore scale
are combined with a threshold strategy to identify
hot-spot elds and characterize their marginal distributions of intensity geometry and spatial proximity in the deformed material conguration. Joint
distributions of hot-spot intensity and size are then
combined with thermal explosion data and analysis
to identify hot-spots that react behind waves and to
examine their statistics. Detailed discussions of the
mesoscale model for porous HMX the simulation
technique and the statistical analysis of hot-spot intensities and morphologies are given in Refs. 3 4
and are not repeated here for brevity.
Computer generated mesostructures of porous
HMX having 0  0.68 and 0.84 and d  60 m
are shown in Fig. 1. A representative hot-spot eld
prediction in the deformed conguration behind a
right-propagating steady wave in each mesostructure is shown in Fig. 2 for a piston speed of Up 
700 ms the corresponding waves speeds are D 
Fig. 2. Predicted hot-spot elds behind steady waves for Up  700 ms a 0  0.68 and b 0  0.84.
The hot-spots have temperature T  Tth  500 K cooler background material having T  Tth has been
removed. The waves not shown in the gure are propagating from left to right.
1857 and 2514 ms respectively. Only hot-spots are
shown in the gure cooler background material has
been ltered out for ease of illustration. Here each
hot-spot represents a region of material having an
internal temperature eld T x  Tth where Tth 
500 K. This threshold value lies between the -
phase transition temperature of HMX  443 K6
and its ignition temperature  600 K7 therefore
it loosely represents the onset of chemical activity.
Numerical experiments indicate that predicted hotspot trends are insensitive to modest variations in
this threshold value because many hot-spots possess internal temperatures that appreciably exceed
this lower bound value.3 Once formed reactive hotspots are largely frozen over simulation time scales
because the thermal diffusivity of HMX is low. It
is evident in the gure that hot-spot size number
and proximity are strongly inuenced by the initial
particle packing density. A goal of this study is to
examine how such hot-spot features can be used to
estimate the global ignition time behind waves as
a function of 0 and wave strength. The approach
used to perform this study is briey discussed in the
following section and then preliminary results are
The analysis focuses on describing statistical aspects of reactive hot-spot formation. Reactive hotspots are identied as the subset of hot-spots that
will thermally explode because they possess sufcient thermal inertia to overcome conductive losses.
The thermal explosion threshold used in this study
is dependent on hot-spot size and peak temperature 3 and is based on the criticality condition established by Tarver et al. 8 for HMX. The analysis
is performed for piston-supported steady waves as
such it is convenient to analyze reactive hot-spots
in a wave-attached frame as conceptually shown in
Fig. 3. In this frame unstressed porous material enters the wave at speed D and stressed compacted
material leaves the wave at speed w  D  Up
where Up is the piston speed and D is the corresponding steady wave speed. The spatial wave
structure has a nite thickness  due to energy dissipation and dispersion within the wave. Though the
compacted state possesses uctuations in thermomechanical elds its effective or average pressure
or temperature may be used to characterize wave
strength. Reactive hot-spots are formed within the
wave due to inelastic pore collapse emerging from
the wave at a frequency that depends on both the
mesostructure and wave strength.
Each reactive hot-spot is identied by the location of its area centroid enabling the formation
rate to be characterized based on hot-spot spacing.
Though other metrics may be used to characterize
spacing e.g. surface-to-surface nearest neighbor
distributions point-to-surface distributions etc.
numerical experiments indicate that the formation
rate is largely insensitive to the choice of metric
 Critical HS Spacing
Fig. 3. An illustration of the reactive hot-spot axial spacing used to compute the formation time between successive hot-spots based on their centroid
for waves dominated by hot-spot nucleation as discussed below. For a given simulation the formation
time dened as the time between successive formation of hot-spots within the wave is estimated
by f  HSD  Up where HS is the axial
distance between their centroids in the compacted
state identied in Fig. 3. The transverse distance
between reactive hot-spots is not used to compute
the distribution of formation times but is implicitly
accounted for by expressing the effective formation
rate as an intensive quantity using the transverse
wave dimension d in the analysis that follows.b Development of a technique that explicitly accounts
for the average transverse spacing between reactive
hot-spots is a current topic of our ongoing research.
This denition of f  which establishes the effective formation rate is inuenced by both reactive
hot-spot spacing and wave speed. It is plausible that
mesostructures having comparable hot-spot spacing
but different wave speeds will have different ignition times because their formation rates will differ.
Figure 4 gives predicted distributions in reactive hot-spot formation time for steady waves in
porous HMX. The distribution is dependent on both
wave strength and mesostructure characterized by
0  0.68 and 0.84. Because simulations of weak
impact require long computational domains to ob
bThe wave dimension d is given by the trans
verse width of the computational domain.
tain statistically signicant numbers of sparsely distributed reactive hot-spots this analysis focuses on
waves corresponding to Up  400 ms which have
sufcient strength to eliminate porosity. Formation
time distributions are approximately exponential indicating that reactive hot-spot formation represents
a time-invariant Poisson process for mesostructures
considered in this study. The cumulative exponential distribution function is given by
where  is the effective formation ratefrequency of
reactive hot-spots. Because the mechanics of hotspot formation depend on the interparticle contact
geometry hot-spot formation times may be strongly
inuenced by the particle size distribution. Though
beyond the scope of this study mesostructures possessing disparate particle sizes may require a mixture of exponential distributions to characterize hotspot formation rates. 9 10
Predicted variations in  with wave strength and
mesostructure summarized in Fig. 5 in terms of
Up for 0  0.68 0.77 and 0.84 can provide
insight into the dynamics of reactive hot-spot formation within waves that may have ignition implications. The dynamics involves a competition between the nucleation growth and agglomeration of
hot-spots as wave strength increases. Here nucleation refers to the formation or seeding of new hotspots in the vicinity of interparticle contact surfaces
whereas growth and agglomeration refer to an increase in hot-spot size and the coalescence of neighboring hot-spots due to plastic ow respectively.c
For each material an exponential increase in  is
initially predicted with increasing Up due to the inuence of hot-spot nucleation with higher porosity
resulting in a higher formation rate for xed Up. As
Up further increases neighboring hot-spots begin
to coalesce resulting in slower increases in  the
value of Up associated with the onset of this strong
shock regime increases with 0. In this regime the
value of  may decrease with a further increase in
wave strength as agglomeration begins to dominate
cBecause reactive hot-spots are identied by
their area centroids in this analysis which is independent of their size agglomeration can cause in a
reduction in  when it dominates nucleation.
Fig. 4. Predicted variation in reactive hot-spot formation time distribution with Up for steady waves in porous
HMX a 0  0.68 b 0  0.84.
r o n g   S h o c k   L i m i
Fig. 5. Predicted variation in the effective reactive
hot-spot formation rate with piston speed for porous
nucleation and hot-spots become ubiquitous within
the material this scenario is illustrated by the case
corresponding to Up  900 ms and 0  0.84. It is
plausible that waves within the strong shock regime
will result in prompt global ignition of material due
to the close spatial proximity of large and intense
In the following sections the effective reactive
hot-spot formation rate is related to wave strength
using 1 an Arrhenius description that leads to a
kinetic interpretation of hot-spot formation and 2
a conventional power law description in terms of
wave pressure. To this end it is desirable to express the formation rate in intensive form based on
the wave frontal area. For the 2-D simulations performed in this study we dene the specic forma
tion rate bycid4  d where d is the transverse wave
width. Thereforecid4 represents the reactive hot-spot
number ux emerging from the wave.
Arrhenius Description
In this section wave strength is characterized in
terms of the temperature rise induced by dissipative
work associated with pore collapse it is related to
the specic hot-spot formation rate by the Arrhenius
where T d  T0  wecv. Here T0 is the ambient
temperature we is the effective mass-specic dissipative work and cv is the mass-specic heat of
cid4 and activation energy Ea and R is the universal
HMX. The Arrhenius parameters are the prefactor
tation with cid4 representing the specic formation
gas constant. The interpretation of the Arrhenius
parameters is analogous to their classical interpre
rate of interparticle contacts or hot-spot seed sites
and Ea establishing the fraction of contacts that
result in reactive hot-spots. Figure 6 summarizes
the predicted variation in we and T e with Up for
0  0.68 0.77 and 0.84 where T e is the effective
temperature. The use of T d in Eq. 2 rather than
T e is based on the premise that dissipative work is
Fig. 6. Predicted variations in the effective dissipative work induced by steady waves in porous HMX
a key hot-spot formation mechanism but the analysis is unaffected by this choice because T d  T e
for waves considered in this study. Both we and T e
monotonically increase with Up with an increase in
dissipative heating with increasing initial porosity
Figure 7 gives the Arrhenius plot of Eq. 2 for
each value 0. The nucleation region for each
curve has an approximately constant slope in this
plane EaR indicating constant activation energy
whereas the agglomeration region is associated with
a smaller activation energy that locally varies with
wave strength. This reduction in activation energy
is a consequence of the agglomeration of reactive
hot-spots with increasing wave strength which reduces their number but increases their size. Best t
values of cid4 and Ea for the nucleation regions are
listed in Table 1. Both cid4 and Ea marginally increase with 0. The increase in cid4 with 0 implies
an increase in the number of seed sites that may
lead to hot-spots whereas the increase in Ea with
0 implies that the energy barrier for forming reactive hot-spots increases with packing density due
to enhanced stress transmission between particles.
Transition between nucleation and agglomeration
dominated regimes is more abrupt for dense material. The ignition implications of such a transition
are unclear but it is interesting that observations
of DDT in porous HMX indicate an abrupt transition to detonation when the strength of a secondary
compaction wave propagating through dense pre
Fig. 7. The Arrhenius plot for specic hot-spot formation rate as a function of dissipative temperature.
Table 1. Computed kinetic parameters for the reactive hot-spot nucleation impact regime.
compacted material reaches a critical value. Though
this critical value is not empirically established the
observations suggest that compaction of dense material results in ubiquitous formation of reactive hotspots once a critical wave strength is reached.
The simulation data contain uncertainties that can
affect the accuracy of best-t Arrhenius parameter
values therefore the small increase in Ea with 0
may not be statistically or computationally signicant though the trends are reasonable.
Power Law Description
In this section wave strength is characterized in
terms of the effective pressure behind the wave by
the power-law expression
The data and best-t curves for each 0 are shown
in Fig. 8 for the nucleation regime values for the
power-law parameters are listed in Table 2. Both the
Table 2. Computed power-law parameters for the
reactive hot-spot nucleation impact regime.
prefactor a and exponent n vary with initial packing
density. As 0 increases for xed P  the effective
bulk modulus of the material increases resulting in
volumetric stiffening and faster waves and reactive
hot-spot spacing increases due to enhanced stress
transmission between particles consequentlycid4 decreases. However because n   logcid4 log P 
the reactive hot-spot formation rate increases more
rapidly with pressure for dense material though
it remains relatively low throughout the nucleation
regime. This more rapid increase in formation rate
with pressure for dense material is consistent with
abrupt ignition once a critical threshold is obtained.
A simple relation for the ignition time behind
steady waves  is proposed in terms of a cumulative ignition function that depends on mesostructure and wave strength through the effective reactive
hot-spot formation rate and wave pressure. The approach is analogous to that used by Terao 11 to estimate the shock-induced ignition probability of reactive gas mixtures based on measured distributions of
thermal explosion time. The relation assumes that
1 ignition occurs during hot-spot nucleation so that
  cid41. The rst assumption restricts the anal  r where r is the wave rise time and 2
ysis to waves of intermediate strength that have an
induction period prior to ignition due to growth and
coalescence of initially small reactive hot-spots by
multiphase transport mechanisms. The second as
sumption is plausible because a large value ofcid4 cor
responds to the rapid formation of closely packed
reactive hot-spots that is likely to enhance the onset of ignition. Implicit in these assumptions is that
waves resulting in signicant hot-spot agglomera

Fig. 8. The predicted specic hot-spot formation
rate as a function of wave pressure.
The cumulative hazard ignition function corresponding to an exponential distribution of reactive
hot-spot formation times for a wave characterized
tion due to widespread plasticity induce prompt ignition because   r.
Here cid4I represents the specic accumulation of
curs behind the wave when cid4I  cid4I. From Eq. 4
the ignition time is given by   cid4Icid41 which
reactive hot-spots behind the wave over time. As a
rst approximation it is assumed that ignition oc
cid4dcid3 cid4.
can be expressed in terms of P and 0 using Eq.
3. The relation for ignition time is then given by
The value ofcid4I is estimated based on DDT data for
porous HMX obtained by McAfee et al. 12 which
indicate that   400 s for P  0.04 GPa
0  0.66 and d  125 m. Using these values
listed in Table 2 the estimate cid4I  7.27 mm1
with the power-law parameter values for 0  0.68
is obtained. Assuming this value to be a property
of HMX it is possible to estimate the variation in
ignition time as a function of wave strength for different values of 0. This assumption is particularly
reasonable for waves considered in this study which
have sufcient strength to eliminate porosity because the effect of residual porosity on ame spread
leading to global ignition is inconsequential therefore the ignition time will be controlled to leadingorder by the spatial proximity of reactive hot-spots
in the completely compacted state and the rate at
which they are formed.
Figure 9 gives the predicted variation in ignition
time behind steady waves in porous HMX. Highlighted in red on the 0  0.68 curve is the single
data point used to establish the value of cid4I. Also
highlighted in the gure is the approximate range
of measured wave rise times reported by Shefeld
et al. 13 for porous HMX for wave strengths considered in this study 0.07  r  0.7 s. Measurements indicate that wave rise time is largely insensitive to the value of 0. The predicted ignition time rapidly decreases with increasing wave
strength for xed 0. There exists a critical wave
pressure that results in   r indicating the onset
of prompt ignition within the wave interestingly
this critical pressure approximately equals that required for the onset of hot-spot agglomeration. Using the terminology of Ref. 13 Region I identied
in the gure which corresponds to   r represents an ignition controlled process because of
the long induction times whereas Region II which
corresponds to   r represents a growth controlled process because the waves are sufciency
strong to induce prompt ignition. Measurements
indicate that the reaction zone is strongly coupled
to the wave front for growth controlled processes
which is consistent with the predictions given here.
Also shown in Fig. 9b are measured detonation
initiation times reported by McAfee et al. 12 and
Dick 14 for 0  0.68. The relative difference between the ignition and initiation time increases with
wave pressure indicating that reaction growth following ignition plays an increasingly important role
in establishing the initiation time scale.
The relative impact and shock sensitivity of explosives is frequently reported in the literature in
terms of the axial run distance to detonation as a
function of input wave pressure. Assuming that
run distance is a monotonic function of ignition
time then it is possible to qualitatively compare
measurements of run distance to ignition time predictions.
In particular measurements on porous
HMX indicate that the run distance to detonation
increases with 0 for xed wave pressure and that
it is slightly more sensitive to variations in wave
pressure for dense material 15 13. Predicted ignition
time curves reect both of these features where the
increase in pressure sensitivity is due to the increase
in the value of power-law exponent n with 0.
An initial study was performed to formally establish how variations in mesostructure affect shock
induced hot-spot formation and ignition of porous
solid explosives using mesoscale simulations. The
strategy identies reactive hot-spots that possess
sufcient thermal inertia to overcome conductive
losses and estimates the induction time  for
their effective formation rate cid4 which is sensitive
global ignition behind steady waves in terms of
to mesostructure and wave strength. This rate is
obtained from the distribution of reactive hot-spot
formation times that is shown to be exponential indicating a time-invariant Poisson process. The pre
dicted variation in cid4 with increasing wave strength
for each mesostructure shows a transition from a
hot-spot nucleation regime associated with the creation of new hot-spots to an agglomeration regime
associated with the growth and coalescence of hotspots by plastic ow at high bulk pressure. Transition between these regimes occurs abruptly for
dense material the implications of this prediction
on ignition and initiation are unclear but seems
compatible with DDT data for porous HMX that indicate abrupt transition to detonation by secondary
compaction waves evolving within dense precompacted material once a critical strength is reached.
A simple relation for  was postulated in terms
of a cumulative ignition function that depends on
tion in cid4 with pressure. To this end ignition was
mesostructure and wave strength through the varia cid41  r where r is the wave rise time. The
assumed to occur during hot-spot nucleation for
critical value of the cumulative ignition function I
was established based on a single experiment for
porous HMX and this value was used with the ignition relation to estimate  for other wave strengths
and mesostructures. Preliminary ignition time predictions appear to be qualitatively consistent with
measured Pop-plot data for porous HMX. The ignition relation may also be used to establish ignition
Sheffield et al. 1997
Fig. 9. a Predicted variation in the global ignition time with wave strength for porous HMX having different
values of 0. b Comparison of the predicted ignition curve with initiation time data for 0  0.68.
manifolds in terms of shock power and energy uence that may facilitate interpretation of measured
manifolds and enable the relative ignition behavior
of different mesostructures to be assessed.16
The approach outlined in this study represents a
rst attempt at using hot-spot formation rates provided by mesoscale simulations to infer information about the effect of mesostructure on shock induced ignition. The current study focused only on
mesostructures having an identical and narrow particle size distribution to isolate the effects of particle size from initial packing density. A focus of
our ongoing research is to characterize how porous
HMX mesostructures containing disparate particle
sizes and spatially dispersed metal particles affect
the variation in ignition time with wave strength.
Lastly this study assumed that each mesostructure was statistically homogeneous for proof-ofconcept therefore predictions were obtained using
a single realization of each mesostructure. Though
ignition and initiation data for porous explosives
are fairly repeatable margins do exist due to statistical inhomogeneities within materials and variations in loading conditions. Exploratory predictions
indicate that seemingly mild inhomogeneities can
produce discernible differences in the reactive hotspot formation rate. Stochastic analysis e.g. Monte
Carlo may be used with this approach to provide information on ignition margins that arise due to uncertainties in initial mesostructure and loading conditions.Microstructural observations of the deformation of a Plastic-Bonded explosive 
Didier Picart Jrme Vial Patrice Bailly and Franck Delvare 
F-37260 Monts France 
Laboratoire PRISME universit dOrlans INSA Centre Val de Loire 
F-18022 Bourges France 
Laboratoire de Mathmatiques N. Oresme UMR 6139 universit de Caen 
F-14032 Caen France 
Abstract. To understand the main mechanisms leading to heating and then initiation of a 
HMX-based  plastic-bonded  explosive  a  reverse  edge-on  impact  experiment  has  been 
designed. This set-up allows optical microscopy to be made during the experiments. The 
microscopic consequences of the impact on a confined sample are detailed and discussed. 
These observations enable proposing a scenario that can lead to initiation for mechanical 
the  behaviour  of  plastic-bonded 
explosives when submitted to impact. For a violent 
one the resulting shock leads to a rapid transition 
to detonation after 1 s. Many models have been 
proposed from macroscopic loading considerations 
to  modern  approaches  based  on  mesoscopic 
considerations and heating due for example to the 
viscoplastic  dissipation  at  the  inner  wall  of  a 
In  the  case  of  low-velocity  impact  HMXbased 
unpredictable energetic reactions. The impact can 
lead to an inert momentum transfer or to a delayed 
violent  reaction  few  hundred  microseconds  after 
the  impact.  Here  unpredictable  means  that  an 
increase  of  the  violence  of  the  reaction  is  not 
systematically  related 
projectile  velocity.  Asay  and  co-writers  1  have 
shown  that  much  work  remain  to  relate  the 
characteristic  of  the  mechanical  insult  to  the 
violence of the reaction. 
This paper is focused on the preliminary stage 
of  the  reactive  process  initiation  needed  for 
safety  studies.  Among 
the  possible  hot-spot 
formation  mechanisms  2-3  Browning  et  al.  4 
and Bennett et al. 5 assumed the friction between 
grains  as  the  heating  cause  of  initiation.  Readers 
can refer to Picart et al. 6 for the calibration and 
the  simulation  of  the  initiation  of  a  HMX-based 
In-depth  studies  of 
mechanism  are  still  uncommon  due  1  to  the 
small scale at which hot-spots grow and 2 to the 
short timescale. These conditions prevent us from 
for  microstructural 
studies. Late in the 90s Skidmore and co-workers 
7  proposed  a  set  of  optical  images  obtained  on 
deformed  PBX9501  microstructures.  Samples 
were submitted to a dynamic punch compression. 
Recovered  samples  were  cut  and  polished  to 
local  mechanisms  of 
deformation. Such post-mortem approach has been 
pursued by the CEA team using samples submitted 
to  calibrated  loads  from  static  to  dynamic  one 
with  various  confinements  or  collected  into  a 
Steven-test target 8.  
Efforts  are  also  made  to  obtain  real-time 
observations of the deformation at the microscopic 
scale.  To  this  aim  a  reverse  edge-on  impact  test 
has  been  designed  and  presented  during  the  14th 
International  Detonation  Symposium  9.  We 
experimental  set-up  in  the  first  section  of  this 
In the second part the initial microstructure of 
the material is presented. 
Experiments  were  made  using  confined  or 
unconfined samples and static to dynamic loading. 
microstructural  consequences  of  an  impact  on  a 
confined sample are discussed in the third part of 
the  paper.  Microcracking  and  microplasticity  are 
analyzed  as  well  as  the  influence  of  the  strain 
localization  into  the  sample.  These  observations 
enable proposing a scenario section 4 that could 
lead to initiation for a mechanical impact. 
1. Experimental set-up 
previously  described  in  reference  9.  The  main 
characteristics  of 
the  experiment  are  briefly 
covered  here.  A  channel  with  a  rectangular  cross 
section is machined into a steel plate. The section 
of  10x3 mm2  is  suddenly  reduced  to  5x3 mm2 
Fig. 1. The sample which initial size is equal to 
10x10x3 mm3 is put into the larger section and in 
front of the step. A thick and transparent window 
closes the assembly and imposes the out-of plane 
confinement of the sample. A steel piston moving 
into  the  channel  is  used  to  extrude  the  material 
The window the motionless steel plate and a 
sample  with  a  polished  surface  enable  observing 
the  deformation  at  the  microscale  using  high 
possible  only  for  quasi-static  loading  due  to  the 
together a large field of view this paper will prove 
that  sub-millimeter  field  of  view  is  inadequate 
and a resolution of 1m. These conditions forbid 
the use of camera for dynamic loading. 
Fig.  1.  Reverse  edge-on  impact  set-up.  The 
sample  blue  is  10x10x3 mm3  9.  The  metallic 
set-up grey is fixed. The pusher grey goes from 
the bottom to the top. The sample is extruded into 
the channel. Fig. 2 refers to the white square. 
The  experimental  procedure  is  as  follow  1 
insert the sample into the channel 2 make a first 
observation of the whole surface of the sample 3 
put the window to close the assembly and build a 
second image 4 extrude the sample -no real-time 
observation for dynamic loading- 5 observe the 
deformed  sample  through  the  window  6  take  a 
last image after the dismantlement of the window. 
Optical microscopy is made with a white light 
beam  with  a  normal 
incidence.  Images  are 
recorded  using  a  CCD  camera.  An  automatic 
positioning algorithm is used to scan the 100 mm2 
of  the  surface  of  the  sample  with  automatic 
adjustments of the tuning and of the aperture. The 
high solid fraction of the material the large range 
of  color  of  the  grain  due  to  their  different 
orientations  the  evolution  of  the  colors  due  to 
damage  and  the  low  contrast  of  the  confined 
microstructure  prohibit 
the  use  of  automatic 
segmentation software. Thus images are analyzed 
here  by  a  one-to-one  comparison  procedure. 
Unfortunately  it  forbids  the  determination  of 
6  enable  using  high 
magnification  lens  x10-100  resolution  of  0.35  to 
0.035  mpixel.  Due  to  the  thickness  of  the 
window  the  image  distance  is  almost  of  10 mm 
during  stages  3  and  5.  Magnification  of  x5  or 
x10 is used resolution of 0.7 or 0.35 mpixel. It 
prevents  in-depth  observations  of  the  smallest 
grains.  Stages  2-3  and  5-6  enable  deducing 
from  the  last  image  obtained  in  6  the  microcracks  due  to  the  closing  and  the  opening  of  the 
assembly. It is very useful after the opening when 
the  material  relaxation 
induces  out-of  plane 
displacements and microcracking. 
To compare the images the upper boundary of 
the  plate  has  been  photographed.  It  serves  as  a 
reference  and  enables  rotating  and  aligning  the 
images taken during stages 2 to 6. 
The  experiment  reported  here  was  conducted 
at a piston velocity of 11.6 m.s-1 using a hydraulic 
compression  machine. 
confinement an inert sample has been placed into 
the  channel  in  front  of  the  free  surface  of  the 
PBX. The behaviour of this material was described 
in 10. A mean macroscopic pressure of 80-200 
two-dimensional  numerical 
simulations the details of the simulations will be 
in  a  forthcoming  paper.  The  highest 
pressure  is  obtained  in  front  of  the  step  and  the 
lowest  at  the  PBXinert  material  interface.  The 
displacement of the interface at the middle of the 
channel is 330 m. This is one limitation of the 
test.  Increasing  the  piston  displacement  leads  to 
high  out-of  plane  force  on  the  window  and  thus 
undesired flow between the window and the plate. 
pistonchannel gap. The pressure into the assembly 
is probably overestimated and future work will be 
devoted  to  measurement  of  the  elastic  plate 
deformation for a better estimation. 
The  loading  condition  experienced  here  is 
close to the one which led to initiation during the 
Asay  et  al.  experiment  7.  The  estimated  punch 
velocity ranges between 15 and 30 m.s-1 due to the 
deformation  of  the  projectile  made  of  copper 
launched  at  200 m.s-1  and  PBX9501  behaviour. 
Initiation was recorded at the edge of the punch 80 
s  after  the  beginning  of  the  loading  meaning  a 
displacement  of  1 mm  at  the  free  surface.  Our 
test being a little bit less aggressive did not result 
in  initiation.  It  enables  observing  the  preliminary 
microscale  deformation  processes  which  could 
lead to initiation. 
2. Initial microstructure 
The  main  observations  of  our  already 
published work for our HMX-based PBX is briefly 
described below. This material is made of a large 
size distribution of ellipsoidal HMX grains mean 
shape  ratio  of  1.2  randomly  orientated  with 
equivalent diameters ranging from 0.1 to 1 mm if 
ellipsoids  are  replaced  by  circles.  Grain  sizes 
higher  than  115 m  occupy  fifty  percent  of  the 
sample surface. For the sake of simplicity we will 
call this phase the L-grains L as larger. The 
rest of the material will be called the matrix. It 
contains  the  smallest  grains  of  HMX  denoted 
bellow  M-grains  the  plastic  binder  and  the 
porosity few percent. 
straight  bands  due 
Some L-grains exhibit microcracking andor a 
microplasticity.  They  are  the  consequence  of  the 
hydrostatic pressure 150 MPa applied to compact 
the explosive powder when manufactured. Most of 
the  microcracks  are  observed  at  L-grainL-grain 
Due  to  the  high  phase  contrast  between  the 
matrix  and  the  L-grains  discussed  later  and  a 
surface preparation polishing without resin some 
defects remain as residues black dots and straight 
lines across the whole surface of the sample. These 
defects will be used when comparing two images 
to  detect  a  shear  deformation  or  a  relative 
displacement between two surfaces. 
3. Microstructural observations 
Fig.  2  shows  the  top  surface  of  the  sample 
after the impact. Due to the dynamic loading the 
window fails drawing black curves at the surface. 
The following analysis will be made far away from 
At  the  contact  between  PBX  and  the  mock 
sample top-left side of fig. 2 the window being 
removed  or  not  only  few  new  intragranular 
microcracks or older ones which have propagated 
a bit appear at L-grainL-grain contacts.  
Fig. 2. Optical micrograph of the surface of the sample after the test. The channel is 5 mm large.  
Fig. 3. Zoom on the zone where deformation has localized yellow square on fig. 2. left before and 
right after the impact. 
decohesion  reveals  the  expected  confining  role 
the  mock  sample.  No 
displacement  between  L-grains  or 
Microplasticity  has  not  significantly  evolved  in 
direction or amplitude. 
Fig. 4. Deformation of a L-grain located in front of 
the edge top-right side in fig. 3. The damaged 
central zone and the S-shaped microcracks indicate 
a shear loading at first followed by an extension 
when the material starts flowing between the plate 
Under  the  interface  and  at  the  left  of  the 
rectangular zone in fig. 2 few vertically-orientated 
intragranular microcracks are observed before the 
window removal. Their black color indicates open 
microcracks and their rectilinear shape a dynamic 
process.  In  the  authors  opinion  they  have  been 
formed  by  the  failure  of  the  window.  The  out-of 
plane  displacement  of  the  glass  has  allowed 
relaxation and cracks formation.  
The material in front of the step the half right 
side  of  the  sample  is  submitted  to  a  high  mean 
stress and a quasi-isostatic loading. It yields hardly 
determinable  L-grains  boundaries  and  details  of 
the  matrix.  No  new  microcrack  is  detected  while 
the window closes the assembly. 
More interesting is the zone of interest ZOI 
delimited using a rectangle in fig. 2 and zoomed in 
in  fig. 3.  In  front  of  the  edge  see  letter  a  in 
fig. 3 the material flows between the window and 
the plate. A lot of horizontal thick microcracks are 
observed along a height of 200-400 m. The shape 
of  a  grain  located  in  front  of  the  edge  indicates 
firstly  a  shear  deformation  see 
boundary  of  the  grain  and  the  central  thick 
damaged  zone  followed  by  the  microcracks 
opening when the material starts flowing between 
the  window  and  the  plate  fig. 4.  It  yields  Sshaped microcracks at the top of the grain and its 
As  the  microstructure  is  observed  from  the 
sides  towards  the  center  of  the  rectangular  zone 
the density of microcracks increases at L-grainLgrain  contacts.  Among  the  high  density  of  new 
microcracks  observed  using  the  microscope  the 
image  taken  before  the  removal  of  the  window 
helps to separate cracks due to material relaxation. 
At  the  bottom  of  the  ZOI  see  letter  b  in 
fig. 3  left  intense  shear  deformation  is  observed 
thanks  to  the respective  position of grains  and of 
the displacements of the straight lines defects. The 
right sides of fig. 3 left are submitted to a vertical 
displacement  white  dot.  The  two  white  arrows 
indicate  material  flow  directions.  L-grains  rotate 
and  are  distorted.  It  yields  L-grains  failure. 
However strain of the L-grains does not exceed a 
few percent. The normal stress is high between Lgrains  leading  to  microcracking  at  the  contact 
Fig. 5. A rotated and fragmented L-grain located 
close to the mesocrack yellow square on fig. 3. 
The size and direction of the straight black lines 
indicate the amplitudes and directions of the 
relative displacements of surrounding M-grains. 
The  specific  geometry  of  the  experiment 
enables localizing the deformation along a vertical 
line joining the edges. Letters c and d in fig. 3 
indicate  areas  where  intense  shearing  occurred. 
The matrix reflects most of the emitted light due to 
an intense damage. A mesoscopic crack has been 
formed  across  the  matrix  fig. 3  vertical  line 
between  letters  d  and  c  or  on  fig. 5  and  a 
relative displacement is observed between its faces 
the  mesocrack  is  observed  even  before  the 
disassembly of the window.  
Fig. 6. Shear implying deformation damage 
fragmentation and pulverization of two L-grains 
blue square on fig. 3. bottom Zoom in on the 
upper image white square showing a progressive 
damage black arrow and a snow-like 
microstructure. Brown dots white arrow. 
the  curved  arrow  gives 
qualitative  rotation  of  the  trapezoidal  L-grain.  Its 
longest  size  is  initially  equal  to  216  m  and 
evolves to 233 m i.e. only small strain of 0.025 is 
experienced  even  in  this  highly  confined  and 
sheared  zone.  Displaced  straight  lines  defects 
indicate relative displacement of the fragments of 
this grain. The lengths of the straight arrows give 
the  quantitative  displacement  observed  for  three 
M-grains  in  its  neighbourhood.  It  suggests  a 
possible  friction  between  the  matrix  and L-grains 
in areas of high confinement and shear. 
Microcracking and relative displacements are 
also  observed  into  the  matrix  surrounding  the 
mesocrack. The thickness of the damage zone goes 
from  150  m  d  to  500-700  m  c  at  the 
right side of the mesocrack. Larger damaged zones 
are  observed  when  L-grains  are  far  from  the 
At the upper part of the damaged zone d in 
fig. 3  two  L-grains  have  been  damaged.  The 
proximity  of  some  larger  L-grains  forces  the 
smaller  ones  to  accommodate  the  deformation  of 
the  shear  band  leading  to  intense  damage  fig. 6 
right.  Microcracking  evolves  progressively  to 
fragmentation and pulverization as the mesocrack 
is approached. Fig. 6 right is a zoom on the upper 
grain of fig. 6 left. One can see increasing density 
of microcracks from the right to the left side of the 
grain  black  arrow.  Surprisingly  a  snow-like 
reflecting-light  structure  appears  between 
fragments end of the black arrow and a network 
of brown dots at the former boundary of the grain 
is viewed white arrow. The first structure is often 
observed  when  the  latter  is  rare.  This  snow-like 
structure particles exhibit a rounded shape could 
have  been  a  consequence  of  1  pulverization  of 
the  fragments  of  the  larger  grain  into  a  fine 
powder 2 phase transition of HMX due to local 
heating  see  for  example  Levitas  et  al.  11  for 
images  of -HMX  crystals  transformed  into   
phase  which  reflects  the  light  3  out-of  plane 
extrusion  of  the  smallest  grains  between  the 
fragments of the grains. Regarding the brown dots 
chemical  investigations  are  needed  before  to 
conclude on quenched hot-spots. 
At  the  bottom  right  side  of  fig. 6  top  no 
relative  displacement  is  observed  between  the  Lgrain and the matrix. 
Snow-like  material  has  also  been  observed 
close to the trapezoidal L-grain fig. 7. 
little  microplasticity  were 
observed  in  the  matrix  which  may  otherwise 
deform. The compliance of the matrix enables the 
L-grains to rotate without stretching. 
3. M-grains contacts will probably stick when 
the  pressure  increases  trapping  the  plastic  binder 
into a fixed microstructure. It decreases the degree 
of freedom of the matrix as it increases damage of 
M-grains by microcracking. The damage zone can 
be as thick as 1 to 1.5 mm thickness of the white 
zone denoted c in fig. 3 right.  
4. Matrix is assumed to behave as L-grains at 
very high confinement anisotropy of HMX crystal 
is neglected here.  
5. At intermediate confinements the thickness 
of the damaged zone depends on the location of Lgrains which act as hard inclusions into the soft 
matrix.  It  probably  increases  the  local  strain 
around  the  inclusion  that  may  be  accommodated 
by  the  matrix.  L-grains  located  into  the  damaged 
fragmentation  and  pulverization  to  facilitate  the 
6.  Mesocracks  grow  and  propagate  into  this 
microcracks  coalesce.  It  enables  shearing  the 
matrix and the closed L-grains. 
7.  Snow-like  structures  have  been  observed 
only  in  the  damaged  zone  into  L-grains  located 
the  mesocrack  observed 
between  the  fragments  or  along  the  mesocrack 
close to the trapezoidal L-grain where shearing is 
highlighted. To the authors opinion the influence 
of shear and friction is clearly demonstrated here. 
It compares well with previous observations made 
on a laterally confined sample dynamically loading 
using  split  Hopkinson  bars.  The  main  differences 
come  from  the  lower  or  nill  microplasticity 
gradient  and  a  lower  relative  displacement  of  the 
8.  The  snow-like  material  seems  to  have 
dilated  during  the  experiment  or  to  have  flowed 
between fragments. Is it a consequence of a phase 
transition the  to -HMX one is known to occur 
with an increase of 7-10 of the volume? Are the 
rounded shape of the particles and their small size 
re-crystallized  HMX?  We  have  not  any  proof  to 
propose.  The  facts  are  1  that  this  material 
microstructure  is  really  different  than  all  the 
microstructures  that  have  been  investigated  till 
Fig. 7.  Snow-like  microstructure  observed  at  the 
top  of  the  trapezoidal  L-grain  A  on  fig. 5 
along the mesocrack. 
Let us now interpret the previous observations 
and  propose  a  scenario  for 
deformation  and  initiation  of  this  HMX-based 
1.  HMX  is  a  brittle  crystal  even  at  high 
100 MPa  here.  Microcracking 
enables accommodating strain by opening close to 
the  edge  or  by  relative  displacement  fig. 4. 
Microplasticity  of  L-grains  has  not  induced  their 
finite  deformation  during  this  test.  However 
readers  must  remember  that  microplasticity  finite 
strain of L-grains and delayed microcracking were 
previously  observed  at  a  higher  confinement 
800 MPa  8.  Interacting  L-grains  results  in  an 
increase  of  microcracks  at  the  contact.  Initiation 
being  never  obtained  during  our  dynamic 
experiments  heating  due 
propagation of microcracks is not a candidate for 
the mechanism of formation of hot-spot. 
extended  size  distribution  of  M-grains  and  Mgrains  possible  rearrangements  their  self-rotation 
has not been quantified here give the matrix more 
degree  of  freedom  than  the  L-grains  alone.  This 
mechanical  contrast  causes  difficulties  to  obtain 
perfectly  polished  microstructures.  It  explains 
why  during  unconfined  experiments  only  few 
now and 2 that it is observed only into the zones 
submitted  to  a  high  confinement  and  an  intense 
9. Except for very high confinement plasticity 
does not yield finite strain grains. For confinement 
the  order  of  magnitude  of  100-300 MPa 
encountered  during  low-velocity  impacts  6  our 
experiment  excludes  microplasticity  from 
possible heating mechanisms leading to initiation. 
Of  course  forthcoming  in-depth  analysis  of  the 
sheared zone is waited to definitively confirm this 
Very  recent  studies  were  made  to  determine 
the  main  heating  mechanism  before  initiation  of 
complete  post-mortem  optical  microstructural 
experiment  has  been  designed. 
collecting  ante-  and  post-mortem  data.  Real-time 
data are also available for quasi-static loading. To 
developments will be devoted 1 to a new design 
of  the  confinement  avoiding  the  window  failure 
and  allowing  higher  pressures 
improvement of the measurements deformation of 
the plate and of the inert sample real-time position 
Results  obtained  during  a  confined  and 
dynamic  experiment  have  been  detailed  in  this 
paper.  The  main  conclusions  are  the  following 
1. The larger grains act as rigid inclusions into 
a  soft  matrix  composed  of  the  smaller 
grains the binder and the porosity. 
2.  The  matrix  stiffens  with 
confinement.  It  decreases 
contrast  with  larger  grains  and  increases 
damage  by  microcracking.  Microplasticity 
was  not  observed  probably  due 
moderate pressure reached during the impact. 
3.  The  influence  of  shear  andor  friction  is 
proved  as  a  mechanism  leading  to  larger 
grains fragmentation and pulverization.  
4.  Snow-like  microstructures  were  observed 
where  shear  or  friction  is  at  work.  As  the 
physical  nature  of 
unknown a re-crystallization of HMX or a to- phase transition is suspected. 
These  observations  made  at  the  surface  need 
be confirmed in the future somewhere else into the 
thickness of the sample. Shock Induced Reactions in Nitromethane and Carbon Disulfide 
Kathryn E. Brown Shawn D. McGrane Cynthia A. Bolme and David S. Moore 
Shock and Detonation Physics Group 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 
Abstract.  Nitromethane  NM  and  carbon  disulfide  CS2  were  subjected  to  a  300  ps 
sustained shock driven by a chirped amplified TiSapphire laser. Using ultrafast dynamic 
ellipsometry UDE and transient absorption spectroscopy we monitored the shock state 
and  onset  of  chemical  reaction  products.  We  found  there  to  be  a  volume-increasing 
reaction  in  NM  beginning  at  up2.4  kms  and  us6.9  kms.  Both  neat  and  chemically 
sensitized  NM  react  under  our  conditions  to  form  absorbing  products.  CS2  also  reacts 
strongly under our shock conditions to form highly absorbing products necessitating the 
use of an alternative method for shock and particle velocity determination. We obtained 
shock and particle velocities for CS2 through impedance matching that are consistent with 
literature plate-impact data. 
Measuring  the  chemical  reactions  and  their 
kinetics  behind  a  shock  wave  in  an  explosive  is 
important  to  having  a  full  understanding  of  the 
shock  to  detonation  transition.  Ultrafast  shock 
experiments can access these chemical reactions.1-6 
Nitromethane  is  a  prototypical  explosive  that  is 
structurally  simple  and  has  well-studied  shock 
induced  reaction  properties.7-15  Carbon  disulfide 
CS2  is  also  well  known  to  react  under  shock 
compression and form light-absorbing products.1623  Here  we  summarize  recent  results  from  shock 
and  particle  velocity  and  transient  absorption 
measurements performed on both NM1 and CS2. 
An  amplified  TiSapphire  laser  was  used  for 
both  the  shock  drive  and  all  diagnostics.  The 
sample cell laser-driven shock generation scheme 
transient  absorption  spectroscopy  and  ultrafast 
UDE  have  all  been 
dynamic  ellipsometry 
described previously.1 3 24 25  
Sample Cell and Laser-Driven Shock Generation 
Our  liquid  samples  12  m  thick  were 
sandwiched  between  a  2  m 
evaporated  onto  a  1-inch  diameter  0.5  mm  thick 
sapphire disc and a 2 mm thick CaF2 window. The 
cell  was  held  in  place  in  a  1  mirror  mount 
A  portion  of  the  TiSapphire  laser  was  left 
uncompressed with a chirp of 300 ps. The chirp 
was  characterized  by  cross-correlation  frequencyresolved optical gating XFROG.26 The red edge 
of  the  laser  pulse  was  clipped  to  provide  a  short 
shock  rise  time.  This  chirped  and  shaped  laser 
pulse  was  incident  through  the  sapphire  of  our 
sample cell where it ablated a small portion of the 
Al drive layer. The generated plasma continued to 
absorb the laser energy and a supported 300 ps 
shock wave was sent through the remainder of the 
Al and into the liquid. We used four different input 
energies  to  drive our  shocks  0.5  mJ  1.0 mJ  1.5 
mJ  and  2.0  mJ.  The  diameter  of  the  shocked 
Transient Absorption Spectroscopy 
We used transient absorption spectroscopy to 
look  for  absorbing  chemical  reaction  products 
generated from shocked NM and CS2. Part of the 
TiSapphire laser was compressed to 100 fs. The 
compressed beam was sent through a 12 mm thick 
CaF2  window  generating  a  3  ps  continuum  of 
white light 400-800 nm. To account for shot-toshot  laser  fluctuations  the  light  was  split  into  a 
signal  and  a  reference  beam.  Data  was  collected 
before the shock and during the shock event. The 
absorbance was calculated by Eq. 1 
where I0 and I are the signal intensity before and 
during  the  shock  respectively  and  R0  and  R  are 
the  reference  intensity  before  and  during  the 
shock respectively. The delay between the shock 
and  white  light  was  varied  in  steps  of  50  ps  in 
order to obtain absorption history and 10 spectra 
from  each  energy  and  delay  were  averaged. 
Materials that are unreactive under our conditions 
still display a small decrease in detected intensity 
due to roughening of the shocked Al surface.3  
Determination Ultrafast Dynamic Ellipsometry 
Ultrafast  Dynamic  Ellipsometry  UDE  was 
used  to  measure  the  shock  velocity  interface 
particle  velocity  and  shocked  refractive  index  of 
NM and CS2. A portion of the same chirped pulse 
from  our  TiSapphire  laser  was  further  split  into 
two spatially-resolved interferometers a low angle 
and a high angle. Each interferometer system was 
comprised of a signal and a reference beam. Each 
signal beam illuminated the region to be shocked 
and  the  reflected  signal  beams  were  combined 
with  their  respective  reference  beams  creating 
interference fringes. The light was imaged onto the 
slit of a spectrometer and further split into s- and 
interferograms  generated  when 
sample  was  shocked  were  converted 
wavelength to time based on the known chirp of 
our  laser.  The  raw  interferograms  were  Fourier 
transformed to obtain phase information and timedependent phase lineouts at the center of the shock 
were  obtained.  The  phase  amplitude  and 
oscillations  arise 
between  the  reflections  of  the  laser  off  of  the 
liquidunshocked  liquid  interfaces.  The  lineouts 
were fit to the thin-film equations allowing us to 
obtain  shock  velocity  us 
interface  particle 
velocity up and shocked refractive index ns. 
Nitromethane  Shock  and  Particle  Velocity 
Results  from  our  NM  UDE  experiments  are 
shown  in  Fig.  1.1  Until  this  study  the  only 
literature us-up  points  crosses  available were for 
NM  shocked  to  up2  kms27  28  where  NM  is 
unreactive.  We  successfully  obtained  us-up  points 
up  to  up3  kms  at  which  NM  is  reactive 
triangles. The volume-increasing reaction occurs 
starting  at  up2.4  kms  and  us6.9  kms.  The 
unreactive  points  circles  are  in  agreement  with 
parameterized  ULH  determined  by  Winey  et  al. 
for  NM.15  Likewise  our  reactive  points  are  in 
good agreement with the NM detonation products 
Hugoniot calculated by Menikoff and Shaw.13 The 
increase  in  scatter  seen  in  our  data  near  the 
volume-increasing reaction  open  squares can  be 
explained  by  our  assumption  of  a  steady  state 
single wave structure in our UDE analysis. In this 
region the reaction rate is similar to the time scale 
of  our  experiments  so  we  do  not  have  a  steady 
state single wave structure. However these points 
were  fit  in  the  same  manner  as  the  unreactive 
points leading to the increased scatter. 
Fig.  1.  Interface  particle  and  shock  velocity  data 
points for NM including plate-impact points from 
27 28 crosses and UDE points from NM in the 
unreactive  filled  circles  cusp  open  squares 
and  reactive  filled  triangles  regimes.  The  black 
solid  line  is  the Winey  et  al.  parameterized  ULH 
for  NM.15  The  dashed  line  is  the  calculated 
Hugoniot for NM products.13 
Nitromethane Transient Absorption 
Transient absorption spectra for neat NM and 
NM with 5 diethylenetriamine DETA both at 
up2.4 kms are shown in Fig. 2.1 The addition of 
small amounts of DETA is known to increase the 
sensitivity  of  NM.29-34  The  average  absorption 
after 300 ps between 410-750 nm for neat NM is 
OD0.09 and OD0.2 for NM5 DETA when  
the  intensity  change  seen  in  unreactive  materials 
that  we  have  attributed  to  Al  roughening  was 
subtracted.1  Neat  NM  forms  absorbing  products 
after 200 ps and by 100 ps for NM5 DETA. 
These  data  are  shown  graphically  in  Fig.  3  the 
error  bars  represent  one  standard  deviation  from 
the average of 10 spectra taken under each shock 
condition at each time. 
Fig. 2. Transient absorption spectra over 300 ps for 
a neat NM and b NM5 DETA. 
Fig. 3. Average transient absorption from 410-750 
nm at 0-300 ps after shock arrival for neat NM 
filled circles and NM5 DETA open circles 
taken under reactive conditions up2.4 kms.   
Carbon Disulfide Transient Absorption  
Transient absorption data of CS2 shocked with 
input  laser  energies  of  0.5  1.0  and  1.5  mJ  are 
shown in Fig. 4 corresponding to upcid311.5 kms 2.5 
kms and 2.8 kms respectively. The first feature 
of  note  of  the  transient  absorption  spectra  is  the 
overall amount of absorption that occurred in all of 
these  experiments.  The  absorbance  OD  of  CS2 
under  our  lowest-energy  shock  conditions  to 
upcid311.5  kms  Fig.  4a  after  300  ps  is  0.1  or 
absorbs  about  20  of  the  incident  light.  When 
shocked to up2.8 kms OD0.3 or absorbs 52 
of  the  incident  light  when  corrected  for  the 
intensity change caused by Al roughening. 
Fig. 4. Transient absorption spectra over 300 ps for 
CS2  shocked  to  a  upcid311.5  kms  b  upcid312.5  kms 
shocked  to  up2.5  kms  there  appears  to  be  an 
The  absorption  spectra  from  CS2  shocked  to 
upcid311.5 kms and upcid312.5 kms are shown in Fig. 5 
uncorrected  for  the  Al  roughening.  The  dashed 
spectra correspond to the data presented in Fig. 4a 
and  the  solid  to  Fig.  4b.  Around  150  ps  when 
absorption  shift.  The  absorption  band  is  broad 
spanning  our  entire  bandwidth  in  some  cases.  As 
such we do not quantify any peak positions. 
Fig.  5.  Absorption  spectra  of  CS2  shocked  to 
upcid311.5  kms  grey  upcid312.5  kms  black.  From 
bottom to top grey spectra represent data from 0 
50  100  150  200  250  and  300  ps  respectively. 
From  bottom  to  top  black  spectra  represent  data 
from 100 150 200 250 and 300 ps respectively. 
Carbon  Disulfide  Shock  and  Particle  Velocity 
Phase  shift  versus  time  lineouts  at  the  center 
of  the  shock  from  UDE  experiments  at  three 
different input laser energies are shown in Fig. 6. 
At  low  input  energy  Fig.  6a  the  overall  phase 
behavior was similar to that seen in other liquids3 
24 and we were able to analyze the data using the 
thin-film  equations.  However  at  increased  input 
shock energies the slope of the phase versus time 
increases after 150 ps Fig. 6b or 20 ps Fig. 6c. 
We have attributed this phenomenon to the highly 
absorbing shock reaction products present between 
the  shock  front  and  Al  drive  layer.  Instead  of 
seeing a reflection from the Al mirror beating with 
a  small  reflection  from  the  shock  front  we  only 
see the reflection off of the shock front.  
optic  in  the  drive  laser  path.  The  impedancematched CS2 up was proportional to the square root 
photodiode. We used this relation to calculate the 
impedance-matched up for each CS2 shot taken.  
intensity  as  measured  on 
literature  CS2  data 
Fig. 7  shows  the us-up  results  from  our  UDE 
and  impedance  matching  experiments  compared 
to the CS2 ULH and literature plate-impact data27 
for  CS2  calculated  using  sound  speed  c1.16 
kms.37 The data that we were able to fit with thinfilm equations triangles is in agreement with the 
ULH and the impedance-matched data circles is 
diamonds.  Horizontal 
impedance-matched  data  are  approximately  the 
size  of  the  points  and  represent  one  standard 
deviation  of  the  impedance-matched  CS2  up  data 
vs.  laser  intensity  square  root  fit.  Vertical  error 
bars  are  smaller  than  the  points  and  are  the 
standard  deviation  of  us  calculated  from  one 
standard  deviation  of  the  linear  slope  fit  of  each 
CS2 phase lineout.  
Fig.  7.  CS2  us-up  points  from  our  UDE  and 
impedance matching experiments. The solid line is 
the CS2 ULH and the grey diamonds are literature 
plate-impact  data.27  The  black  triangles  are  lowenergy data that were fit with thin-film equations. 
The  black  circles  are  data  that  were  fit  by 
impedance matching. 
Fig  6.  UDE  lineouts  from  CS2  shocked  to  a 
upcid311.5 kms b upcid312.5 kms and c up2.8 kms. 
b  and  c  are  offset  by  3  and  6  radians 
We used impedance matching to characterize 
the  lineouts  obtained  from  UDE  for  CS2  shocked 
above 6 GPa  We used Eq. 2 
where  is the wavelength of the UDE probe n is 
n1.605635    is  the  probe  angle  of  incidence 
interior to the CS2  is the phase change and 
t is the time span to estimate the shock velocity 
The particle velocity up was calculated using 
impedance  matching  of  the  Al  drive  layer.  We 
again  used  our  UDE  system  to  obtain  time 
dependent  phase  lineouts  from  the  center  of  the 
shocked bare aluminum on the sapphire substrate. 
We used the slope of the phase versus time in Eq. 
2 with nair1 to obtain the free surface velocity of 
the  Al  ufs  under  the  assumption  that  ufs2up  for 
Al.  Using  the  Hugoniot  of  Al  606127  and  the 
universal  liquid  Hugoniot  ULH36  of  CS2  and 
c01.1637 we calculated the CS2 up.  
In  order  to  account  for  laser  fluctuations  we 
used a photodiode to measure a reflection from an 
Nitromethane  Shock  and  Particle  Velocity 
We  obtained  the  first  overdriven  NM  us-up 
data.1  There  are  three  regions  shown  in  Fig.  1 
unreactive  NM  circles  reactive  NM  triangles 
and points on the cusp squares. Any reaction in 
the  unreactive  region  occurred  more  slowly  than 
our  time  scale  and  the  reaction  in  the  reactive 
points  occurred  faster  than  our  time  scale.  The 
points in the cusp region however had the onset 
of  reaction  occurring  on  the  order  of  our  time 
scale likely the order of 10s of ps. These points do 
not arise from a steady state and are not Hugoniot 
We  plotted  the  calculated  NM  detonation 
products  Hugoniot  from  Menikoff  and  Shaw13 
Fig.  1  dashed  line.  Our  data  show  striking 
similarity  to  the  calculated  Hugoniot  suggesting 
that  significant  reaction  progress  has  occurred  in 
these  sub-nanosecond  experiments.  This  reaction 
than  expected  based  on  historical 
experiments  detailed  in  a  paper  submitted  by 
McGrane et al. to these same proceedings. 
Nitromethane Transient Absorption 
The  transient  absorption  spectra  we  obtained 
of  neat  NM  and  NM5  DETA  do  not  tell  us 
what  the  chemical  shock-induced  decomposition 
mechanism  is.  However  as is  apparent  in Fig. 3 
the rate of change of absorbance with time for both 
neat  NM  0.60.06  ODns  and  NM5  DETA 
0.70.07  ODns  is  similar  indicative  of  a 
comparable  reaction  rate  in  both  solutions  but 
with  decreased  induction  time  in  the  sensitized 
solution. Likewise the spectral evolution see ref. 
1  is  similar  in  both  cases.  Both  phenomena 
that  chemical  shockinduced  decomposition  mechanism  in  sensitized 
NM is the same as in neat NM. 
Carbon  Disulfide  Shock  and  Particle  Velocity 
Given  the  high  OD  obtained  in  our  transient 
absorption  experiments  we 
unusually large time dependent phase of our UDE 
lineouts  from  higher  up  shocks  to  be  due  to  the 
shocked  liquid  layer  becoming  nearly  opaque. 
between  the  reflections  off  of  the  Al-liquid  and 
shocked-unshocked  liquid  interfaces  the  opacity 
of the absorption products prevents observing the 
UDE probe that has reflected off of the Al-liquid 
interface. Thus we interpret the high phase slope 
to be due solely to reflection off of the shock front. 
The small oscillations apparent are due to thin-film 
interference  between 
liquid-CaF2  window 
interfaces.  The  data  are  consistent  with  the  ULH 
for CS2. It appears that the cusp of where shocked 
CS2  undergoes  the  volume-decreasing  reaction 
occurs  at  a  higher  us-up  point  than  the  literature 
data  this  would  be  expected  as  reactions  on  our 
ultrafast time scale require more input energy than 
on  a  longer  time  scale.  More  data  needs  to  be 
taken  in  order  to  better  identify  the  cusp  region 
where  CS2  undergoes  a  volume-decreasing 
reaction and deviates from the ULH.  
Carbon Disulfide Transient Absorption 
Although  not  chemical-specific  the  transient 
absorption  data  we  obtained  give 
insight into the decomposition of shocked CS2. As 
shown  in  Fig.  5  grey  traces  the  absorption 
spectra  from  the  upcid311.5  kms  shocks  grow  in  on 
the blue edge. Because our white light generation 
and detection extends in the blue only to 400 nm 
it  is  difficult  to  determine  the  peak  position. 
Qualitatively  it  is  clear  that  the  spectra  from  the 
upcid312.5 kms shocks black traces also grow in on 
the blue edge bottom black trace but shift to the 
red and grow in intensity with increasing time. The 
absorption spectra in Fig. 5 can be correlated with 
the  time-dependent  phase  lineouts  shown  in  Fig. 
6a-b.  The  grey  traces  in  Fig.  5  and  the  timedependent  phase  lineout  in  Fig.  6a  are  both  from 
absorption  spectra  for  this  domain  have  the 
characteristic  shape  shown  in  the  grey  traces  of 
Fig. 5. Here we still see the reflection from the Al 
drive  layer.  The  upcid312.5  kms  transient  absorption 
spectra  black  traces  Fig.  5  and  the  timedependent  phase  lineout  in  Fig.  6b  start  with 
similar  behavior  to  that  of  the  upcid311.5  kms  data. 
to  upcid311.5  kms.  The 
However  at  150  ps  after  the  shock  the  shocked 
CS2 layer begins to absorb so much light that we 
only see the reflection off of the shock front rather 
than  the  Al  drive  layer.  At  the  same  time  the 
transient  absorption  spectrum  visibly  shifts.    A 
chemical-specific technique such as coherent antiStokes  Raman  scattering  CARS  spectroscopy 
would be useful  in  determining  the  identities  and 
kinetics of the reaction products. 
Nitromethane  exhibited  a  volume  increase  in 
Hugoniot  measurements  signaling  a  transition 
from the reactant to product Hugoniot in under 300 
ps.  Transient  absorption  of  reaction  products  was 
also  observed  within  300  ps  of  the  shock  front. 
CS2  reacted  to  form  strongly  absorbing  products 
and  as  such  the  interferometric  determination of 
the shock front had to be performed in a different 
and  particle  velocity 
measurements  for  CS2  are  consistent  with  plateimpact  data  and  more  work 
characterize the volume decreasing reaction. Toward Understanding the Low Sensitivity of FOX-7 to Initiation  
High Pressure  High Temperature Polymorphism and Chemical Stability  
Zbigniew A. Dreger Yuchuan Tao and Yogendra M. Gupta 
Institute for Shock Physics and Department of Physics and Astronomy 
Washington State University Pullman WA 99164 USA 
Abstract. Vibrational spectroscopy measurements were used to examine the vibrational 
polymorphic and reactive behavior of 11-diamino-22-dinitroethene FOX-7 to elucidate 
its  structural  and  chemical  stability  under  high  pressure  and  temperature.  Raman 
spectroscopy  results  indicated  several  instances  of  coupling  or  mixing  of  modes 
strengthening and ordering of hydrogen bonding and phase transition at  2 and 4.5 GPa. 
Despite these transformations further compression to 40 GPa and subsequent release of 
pressure  did  not  cause  any  irreversible  changes.  The  observed  remarkable  chemical 
stability under high pressure and increase in vibrational coupling with pressure may have 
implications for the shock insensitivity of FOX-7.  
High performance and low sensitivity are two 
extremely desirable attributes for a high explosive. 
11-Diamino-22-dinitroethene  C2NH2NO22  also 
known as FOX-7 or DADNE is a promising highenergy  material  that  possesses  these  attributes.1-6 
Its  low  sensitivity  to  initiation  has  attracted 
considerable  interest  but  the  microscopic  factors 
that  govern  the  low  sensitivity  are  not  well 
understood.  An important step toward advancing 
this  understanding  is  to  gain  insight  into  the 
vibrational and crystallographic structure of FOX7 at the thermo-mechanical conditions relevant to 
polymorphic phases and determination of chemical 
stability  at  high  pressure  and  high  temperature 
HP-HT  are  of  particular  interest.  Despite  this 
need  the  behavior  of  FOX-7  under  HP-HT 
conditions is not well established.  
FOX-7  crystallizes  in  a  monoclinic  structure 
with  molecules  arranged  head-to-tail  forming 
the  HP-HT  conditions 
wave-shaped layers with extensive intra- and intermolecular hydrogen bonding within the layers and 
Van  der  Waals  forces  between  the  layers1  see 
Figure  1.  This  characteristic  crystal  structure  and 
the  presence  of  amino-  and  nitro-groups  in  the 
molecules are believed to contribute to the stability 
of  FOX-7  at  ambient  conditions.  However  their 
is  not  wellunderstood.      
temperature  and  ambient  pressure  demonstrated 
that  the  room  temperature  structure  -FOX-7 
transforms  to  two  other  polymorphs    and    at 
higher  temperatures.7-9  The  -  and  -polymorph 
structures  were  determined  to  be  of  the  space 
groups  P212121  and  P21n 
increase in the displacement of nitro groups out of 
the  molecular  plane  was  associated  with  both 
transformations.  It  was  also  determined  that  both 
transformations involved changes in the hydrogen 
bonding network.7-9   
Fig.  1.  Crystal  structure  of  FOX-7  at  ambient 
conditions.  The  top  and  bottom  panels  display 
projections  of  crystal  on  011  and  101  planes 
respectively.  Legend  Carbon  grey  Nitrogen 
blue Oxygen red Hydrogen white.  
On the other hand the high pressure response 
of FOX-7 is not well established and contradictory 
results  have  been  reported  on  possible  structural 
and chemical changes.10-12  
In  this report we  summarize  our  recent work 
on  FOX-7  using  spectroscopic  methods  under 
static compression.13 14 In particular we examined 
in  vibrational  structure  polymorphic 
transformations and HP-HT reactivity. Unlike the 
previous studies on FOX-7 powders results in our 
work  were  obtained  on  single  crystals  and  under 
controlled pressure loading.  
Experimental Methods 
FOX-7 powder was provided by J. Carney of 
the  Naval  Surface  Warfare  Center    Indian  Head 
Division  NSWC-IHD.  Single  crystals  were 
grown from a solution of the powder in dimethyl 
sulfoxide  DMSO  at  room  temperature.  Typical 
rectangular  shapes  with  welldeveloped faces either normal or parallel to the b
of 
axis.  High  pressures  were  generated  using  a 
modified  Merrill-Bassett  type  diamond-anvil-cell 
DAC.  A  rhenium  gasket  served  as  the  sample 
compartment.    Most  experiments  were  performed 
using  cryogenically  loaded nitrogen  as  a pressure 
transmitting  medium.  Occasionally  cryogenically 
loaded argon neon or helium or methanol ethanol 
mixture  were  also  used  as  pressure  transmitting 
measurements  was  estimated  to  be  0.05  GPa.  
to  650  degree  were 
maintained  by  using  a  resistive  heater  wrapped 
around  the  DAC.  The  sample  temperatures  were 
monitored  using  iron-constantan  thermocouples. 
The  accuracy  of  temperature  measurements  was 
determined to be  2 K.13-16 
A micro-Raman system T64000 JY-Horiba 
equipped  with  a  microscope  was  used  to  provide 
the  spectra  and  images  of  FOX-7  at  various 
pressures and temperatures. The 532 nm line from 
a  CW  diode-pumped  solid-state 
employed  for  Raman  excitation.  The  Raman 
detection system provided a spectral resolution of 
 0.8 cm-1 and was capable of measuring spectra to 
frequencies as low as 20 cm-1. Less than 1 mW of 
power  was  used  to  avoid  any  damage  to  the 
sample.  The single crystals used in these studies 
were  oriented  such  that  the  b-axis  was  either 
parallel  or  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  the 
excitation beam.13 14 
Results and Discussion 
Raman Spectra and Crystal Images14 
Typical  Raman  spectra  of  FOX-7  single 
crystals at various pressures in the frequency range 
20-1300  cm-1  are  shown  in  Fig.  1.  These  results 
were  obtained  in  a  nitrogen  medium.  However 
very similar results were also obtained in helium. 
A  close  examination  of  the  spectra  indicates 
changes around 2 and 4.5 GPa. This observation is 
also confirmed by discontinuities in mode shifts at 
these  pressures  see  Fig.  3.    The  changes  above 
these pressures were attributed to new phases and 
labeled  as  I  and  II.  Upon  further  increase  of 
pressure  above  4.5  GPa  there  were  no  other 
obvious  discontinuities  but  only  changes  in  the 
absolute and relative intensities of different peaks 
and gradual changes in their pressure dependence. 
intensity  and  the  pattern  of  the  peaks  were  fully 
reversible after a complete release of pressure see 
for comparison the top and bottom spectra in Fig. 
2.    This  result  shows  that  neither  the  pressure 
increase  to  40  GPa  highest  pressure  reached  in 
this  work  nor  the  subsequent  release  of  pressure 
to  1  atm  caused  any  measurable  irreversible 
changes.  The  chemical  stability  of  FOX-7  over 
such a large range of pressure is remarkable but in 
accord with its low sensitivity.        
200 400 600 800 1000 1200
Fig.  2.  Raman  spectra  of  FOX-7  at  several 
pressures in GPa. Insets indicate detailed changes 
In  Fig.  3  we  show  pressure  shifts  of  the 
Raman modes in the selected frequency range.  In 
addition  to  the  discontinuities  at  2  and  4.5  GPa 
there are also several cases of substantial coupling 
or  mixing  between  different  modes  at  various 
pressures.  This  behavior  was  observed  between 
modes  either  both  fundamental  or  fundamental 
and  combinationovertone.  The  analysis  of  the 
couplings indicated that they may be described in 
terms  of  a  Fermi  resonance  model  by  using  a 
pressure dependent coupling parameter.14  
The molecular mechanism for shock initiation 
of  FOX-7  is  unknown  however  it  is  often 
anticipated  that  the  C-NO2 bond homolysis  could 
process.17  Because  the  coupling  was  observed 
between the C-NO2 and NH vibrations it suggests 
that the energy is likely delocalized between the CN  and  N-H  bonding  vibrations  under  high 
pressure.  Therefore  the  observed  coupling  may 
have  some  implication  for  the  shock  insensitivity 
Fig. 3. Pressure-induced shifts of Raman peaks in 
the selected frequency range. Experimental results 
represented  by  points  are  connected  with  lines  to 
guide  the  eye.    Note  that  the  mode  plotted  with 
open  circles  does  not  cross  with  other  modes. 
Circles  indicate  the  frequency  regions  of  modes 
The ambient structure of FOX-7 is maintained 
due  to  the  extensive  network  of  intermolecular 
the  symmetric  and 
hydrogen  bonds.1  Thus  hydrogen  bonding 
response under high pressure is of special interest 
because it can provide insight into the stability of 
this  crystal  at  extreme  conditions.  Changes  in 
hydrogen  bonding  were  examined  by  monitoring 
changes in the NH2 stretching vibrations.  In FOX7  there  are  four  NH2  stretching  vibrations  two 
symmetric  and  two  asymmetric.  Pressure  effects 
on  these  vibrations  are  shown  in  Figure  4. 
Frequencies  of  both 
asymmetric  NH2  modes  decrease  with  the  initial 
pressure  increase  this  behavior  can  be  attributed 
the  strengthening  of  hydrogen  bonding.  
However  at  higher  pressures  there  is  a  gradual 
change in the direction of these shifts. The turning 
pressure  for  this  change  coincides  approximately 
with  the  discontinuities  observed  in  many  other 
modes at 4.5 GPa as well as with the increase in 
coupling  between  the  symmetric  NH2  and  the 
combination  modes.  Thus  the  increase  in  the 
frequency  of  NH2  stretching  vibrations  at  higher 
pressures  appears  to  result  from  the  structural 
changes occurring at 4.5 GPa. A steep increase in 
the  frequency  of  two  symmetric  vibrations  after 
transition  suggests  a  substantial 
softening  of  the  hydrogen  bonding  network  at 
Fig. 4. Pressure-induced shifts of Raman modes in 
the region of NH2 stretching vibrations. 
As shown in Figure 5 changes in the Raman 
spectra  were  accompanied  by  changes  in  the 
crystal appearance and color.  The initially yellow 
crystal  transformed  instantaneously  around  5.1 
GPa  to  a  less  transparent  crystal  with  a  greyish 
appearance. At pressures higher than 20 GPa the 
crystal  became  reddishbrownish  and  with  visible 
changes in the pressure transmitting medium.  The 
changes in crystal appearance and color were also 
accompanied  by  an  increase  in  the  intensities  of 
selected Raman peaks. Thus the observed increase 
in Raman intensity at higher pressures could result 
from resonance effects.  
Fig. 5. Images of FOX-7 single crystal in DAC 
under several pressures pressures are given in 
High Pressure Polymorphism1314 
Raman spectra obtained just below and above 
2 GPa indicate that a limited number of modes is 
affected  around  2  GPa.  These  include  changes  in 
slopes  of  some  modes  and  changes  in  peaks 
pattern see Fig. 6 panel a. All of these changes 
were  reproducible  in  various  pressure  media  and 
were  reversible  at 
the  same  pressure  upon 
unloading from pressures above 2 GPa.  
Previously  it  was  sugested  that  the  phase 
temeperature  -phase.12  To 
conjecture  in  Figure  6  we  compared  the  phase-I 
spectrum  measured  at  2.6  GPa  with  the  -phase 
spectrum measured at 395 K. It is evident that the 
two spectra are very different indicating that they 
represent  different  structures.  Unlike  the  changes 
at high temperature the limited extent of changes 
at 2 GPa implies fairly minor modifications to the 
FOX-7  structure  likely  affecting  the  molecular 
Fig.  6.  Raman  spectra  obtained  in  the  low 
range  at  high  pressure  or  high 
temperature  a  below  and  above  2  GPa  arrows 
indicate the appearance or disappearance of peaks 
and b at 395 K -phase. 
Phase-II above 4.5 GPa 
In  contrast  to  the  behavior  at  2  GPa  the 
spectral  changes  at  4.5  GPa  are  very  extensive. 
They include substantial changes in both the lattice 
and internal vibrations spectra.  In Figure 7 panel 
a we compare the spectra obtained at 4.3 and 5.1 
GPa  in  the  low  frequency  range.  For  instance  in 
the  range  of  lattice  modes  two  well  separated 
peaks  transformed  to  two  overlapped  peaks.  We 
also notice that the small peaks outside of the two 
overlapped  peaks  are  the  leftovers  from  the 
spectrum of 4.3 GPa. The presence of these peaks 
at  pressures  above  4.5  GPa  indicates  that  the 
transformation  was  not  fully  completed  at  the 
transition pressure. Furthermore we demonstrated 
that  the  changes  observed  at  4.5  GPa  during 
loading  display  considerable  hysteresis  during 
unloading.    The  high  pressure  phase  phase-II 
persisted  down  to    1.0-1.5  GPa  indicating  its 
metastable character over a broad pressure range. 
This  large  hysteresis  suggests  a  reconstructive 
transformation.    We  note  that  phase-I  was  not 
observed upon  unloading from  phase-II.    Instead 
the  crystal  transformed  directly  to  the  -phase 
below 1.0-1.5 GPa.  
50 100 150 300 400 500 600
Fig.  7.  Raman  spectra  obtained  in  the  low 
range  at  high  pressure  or  high 
temperature a below and above 4.5 GPa and b 
at 357 K -phase quenched to lower temperature. 
thereby  demonstrating 
In  Figure  7  we  also  compare  the  phase-II 
spectrum with the spectrum of high temperature phase to address the claim of structural similarity 
between these two phases.12 Note that the spectrum 
of -phase was measured after quenching to 357 K. 
As seen in the figure the  phase peaks are broad 
and  strongly  overlapped  with  each  other  within 
150 cm-1.  In contrast the phase-II peaks are well 
separated  and  markedly 
frequencies.  These two very different patterns are 
not  easily  compared  but  they  do  show  that  the 
Raman  spectra  in  the  lower  frequency  range  are 
very  different.  This  example 
differences between the spectra of phase-II and the 
structures.  However for completeness we need to 
mention  some  similarities  in  the  overall  behavior 
of  phase-II  and    i  transitions  to  these  phases 
were  irreversible  at  their  phase  boundaries  ii 
both  phases  were  recoverable  either  at  lower 
pressure  or  temperature  respectively  and  iii 
sample  appearance  changed  at  the  transitions.  
These  similarities  suggest 
transition  have  a 
reconstructive character. 
In  addition  the  crystal  imaging  under  high 
pressure revealed both the changes in the crystal 
appearance and dimensions at the phase-I to phaseII transition Fig. 8. A careful analyses of images 
indicated the reduction of crystal size in the 010 
direction  and  enlargement  in  the  101  plane. 
Work  is  in  progress  to  determine  the  exact 
structure of FOX-7 above 4.5 GPa 
Fig.  8.  Images  of  FOX  single  crystals  of  two 
different orientations in DAC at pressures around 
the phase transition from phase-I to phase-II. 
Static  compression  experiments  at  high 
pressure  and  high  temperature  have  provided 
insensitivity  of  FOX-7.  In 
particular we demonstrated i chemical stability 
of  FOX-7  to  40  GPa  regardless  of  the  phase 
transitions that we identified at 2 and 4.5 GPa ii 
coupling or mixing of various molecular vibrations 
under  high  pressure 
delocalization  of  molecular  vibration  within  the 
molecule  and  iii  strengthening  and  ordering  of 
H-bonding under high pressure  Predicting the Elastic and Thermal Properties of Energetic Crystals using Quantum 
Malcolm D. Cook Helen M. Cook and Phil  J. Cheese 
AWE Aldermaston Reading Berkshire UK RG7 4PR 
DES MoD Abbey Wood Bristol UK BS34 8JH 
Abstract. Knowledge of the physical and mechanical properties of energetic materials are 
required for continuum descriptions within macroscopic finite element codes.There are a 
number  of  approaches  to  deriving  the  physical  and  mechanical  properties  of  energetic 
formulations  from  their  constituent  parts  and  these  include  the  method  of  mixtures 
strength of materials and Mori Tanaka schemes. However all these methods assume that 
data is available for the individual components the energetic crystal filler and the binder 
system. In this paper we describe how the elastic constants thermal properties specific 
heat thermal conductivity and thermal expansion as well as the equation-of-state of the 
energetic  filler  can  be  predicted  from  a  pair-potential  between  two  molecules  using 
readily available quantum chemistry tools. 
chemical  physical  and  mechanical  models  that 
span  atomic  to  macroscopic  length  scales.  The 
motivation being to build macroscopic models that 
encompass  molecular  and  crystal  level  effects 
which  often  subtly 
behaviour  of  materials.    This  is  particularly  true 
for  energetic  materials  whose  macroscopic 
properties  are  controlled  by  a  complex  mix  of 
molecular  level  and  crystal  level  chemistry  and 
physics. Development of macroscopic mechanical 
and  chemical  models  for  energetic  crystals  will 
allow the viability of stable crystal polymorphs to 
be  determined  and  their  ignition  burning  and 
detonability  characteristics  to  be  ascertained.  The 
crystal  mechanical  and  chemical  properties  are 
also central to the prediction of hazard properties. 
In  particular  they  provide  the  foundation  for 
predicting the mechanical and chemical properties 
of  the  formulation  via  method  of  mixtures  or 
through more sophisticated treatments such as the 
Mori Tanaka model1. 
There  have  been  a  number  of  approaches  to 
determining the mechanical properties of energetic 
materials  at  the  atomistic  level23.  These  include 
Monte  Carlo  Molecular  Dynamics  cell  and 
reference  site  interaction  models.  The  former  are 
based  on  Newtonian  mechanics  and  the  latter 
statistical  mechanics.  A  common  feature  of  all 
these  methods  is  the  determination  of  a  suitable 
intermolecular  potential  that  describes  the  energy 
change  with  distance.  There 
compromise  to  be  made  in  developing  suitable 
intermolecular  potentials  between  a  highly 
accurate  solution  that  takes  limited  account  of 
many-body  interactions  employing  only  a  few 
molecules  and  a  simplified  mean-field  approach 
that can be used in large simulations consisting of 
thousands or millions of atoms or molecules. 
In  the  model  we  describe  in  this  paper  we 
employ a high level of theory to develop accurate 
pair-wise  potential  energy  functions  between  two 
identical  energetic  molecules  and  use  this  to 
predict  the  elastic  and  thermodynamic  properties. 
We describe the method and present results for a 
number  of  standard  explosive  crystals.  We 
compare the results to available literature data and 
discuss  the  accuracy  and  applicability  of  the 
approach.  The  model  is  complimentary  to  more 
thorough  Monte  Carlo  and  Molecular  Dynamics 
The  model  we  present  assumes  that  a  given 
molecule  within  a  solid  homogeneous  material  is 
surrounded  by  a  number  of  nearest  neighbours 
and  that  it  is  the  interactions  with  these  nearest 
neighbours  that  are  primarily  responsible  for  the 
chemical  and  physical  properties  of  the  material. 
Within an individual molecule the intra-molecular 
forces  result  in  relatively  strong  binding  whereas 
the inter-molecular forces are relatively weak van 
der Waals interactions. 
It  is  assumed  that  crystal  packing  can  be 
reduced  to  hexagonal  geometries  in  most  cases. 
This  means  that  a  cluster  of  six  molecules 
surrounding a central molecule is considered with 
more  distant  neighbors  having  a  minor  influence 
approximation.  A  further  simplification  can  be 
made  in  that  only  the  interaction  between  two 
molecules  needs  to  be  considered.  However  if 
only  one  specific  interaction  is  studied  then  this 
should  be  along  the  axis  of  the  largest  energy  of 
interaction typically along the dipole moment. 
These  simplifications  allow  very  accurate 
calculations  to  be  performed  to  generate  a  onedimensional potential energy surface between two 
neighbouring  molecules.  Although  the  principal 
calculations should be along the dipole moment of 
the  molecules  further  calculations  orthogonal  to 
this  will  allow  the  contributions  from  these 
orientations to be assessed. In many instances the 
calculation  of  a  pair-wise  potential  may  be 
sufficient but full hexagonal close packing would 
be expected to give improved results. 
We  can  determine  the  energy  of  isolated 
molecules in the gas phase using standard quantum 
chemistry  molecular  orbital  computer  programs. 
For the calculations that we present here we have 
employed the GAUSSIAN094 code. We have used 
theory  approximation 
consisting  of  Beckes  three-parameter  functional 
B35 and Lee Yang and Parrs LYP correlation 
function6.  We  have  combined  this  with  a  6311G basis set. For the method to be useful we 
need  to  assume  that  this  level  of  theory  is 
sufficient to describe the Van der Waals forces in 
terms  of  the  derived  intermolecular  potential. 
Whether  this  is  sufficient  can  be  verified  by  the 
prediction of mechanical properties  through  these 
molecular level calculations and comparison to the 
macroscopic scale experimental results. 
We  begin  by  optimizing  the  structure  of 
isolated  molecule  and  determine  the  gas  phase 
thermodynamic  properties  via  a 
frequency calculation. It is important to choose the 
right  starting  configuration  for  the  molecule  to 
obtain  the  correct  molecular  structure  for  a  given 
polymorph.  Care  is  taken  to  ensure  that  no 
imaginary frequencies are obtained thus indicating 
that a true minimum energy state has been found. 
The optimized geometry so obtained is used as the 
input  into  a  pair-wise  calculation  where  the  two 
molecules  are  aligned  along  their  dipole.  A  full 
optimization  followed  by  a  frequency  calculation 
of  the  two  molecules  aligned  along  their  dipoles 
resulted  in  no  imaginary  frequencies.  We  assume 
that we can use the thermodynamic data from this 
super-molecule  as  representative  of  the  solid 
state. A potential scan is then performed using the 
fixed  optimized  geometry 
molecule  calculation 
potential  surface  as  the  distance  between  the 
molecules is reduced step-wise from around ten to 
two angstroms. Smallest steps are made around the 
minimum typically of the order of 0.1 angstroms. 
At very large distances the potential energy is 
approximately zero but as the molecules approach 
one  another  the  potential  energy  falls  reaching  a 
minimum after which the energy rises ultimately 
becoming positive at very small distances. As the 
two molecules are displaced from their equilibrium 
separation  they  experience  a  restoring  force.  For 
small displacements the variation in the potential 
energy  is  approximately  linear  and  the  force  is 
approximately  proportional  to  the  displacement. 
This  is  the  origin  of  Hookes  law  and  we  can 
therefore  estimate  Youngs  modulus  from  this 
potential.  We  can  estimate  the  molecular  volume 
either via the area of the parallel faces between the 
separation  distance  or 
GAUSSIAN094  can  calculate  it  directly  at  each 
point.  For  the  calculations  we  present  here  we 
have chosen the former to allow rapid calculation.  
The pressure or  stress    between  the  molecules 
can  be  calculated  by  the  change  in  energy  over 
volume. The strain  can be calculated from the 
separation  distance  from  the  minimum  of  the 
potential well. From this a stress-strain curve can 
be  constructed  and  Youngs  Modulus  E  derived 
from the initial slope of the curve.  
The  bulk  modulus  B  is  obtained  from  the 
calculated  minimum  energy  volume  V0  and  the 
change in pressure with volume 
where  V   is  the  volume  and  P   the  pressure. 
Having  calculated  Youngs  and  the  bulk  moduli 
we can derive Poissons ratio  via 
and the shear modulus from 
these  basic  parameters  are  known 
further  thermodynamic  quantities  such  as  the 
sound  speed  thermal  conductivity  and  thermal 
expansion can be calculated. An equation-of-state 
can also be constructed. This can take the form of 
pressure versus VVo or can be depicted in shock 
velocity  particle velocity space. 
The particle velocity can be calculated thus 
and the shock velocity by 
approximates the Hugoniot in P-V space over the 
fundamental  parameter  closely  related  to  many 
physical  properties  such  as  elastic  constants 
specific heat and melting temperature and it can be 
calculated from Youngs modulus E bulk modulus 
B  and  shear  modulus  G.  It  is  the  temperature  at 
which the wavelength of vibration of the atoms in 
a  crystal  lattice  is  equal  to  the  length  of  the  unit 
At  low  temperature  the  vibrational  excitation 
arises  solely  from  acoustic  modes.  Hence  at  low 
temperatures  the  Debye  temperature  calculated 
from  elastic  constants 
determined from specific heat measurements. One 
of  the  standard  methods  to  calculate  the  Debye 
temperature  D  is  from  elastic  constants  data 
since D may be estimated from the average sound 
velocity m by the following equation7 8 9 
where  h  is  Plancks  constant  kB  Boltzmanns 
constant  NA  is  Avogadros  number  M  is  the 
molecular  mass  and    the  density.  The  average 
sound  velocity  in  the  polycrystalline  material  is 
Where vl and vt are the longitudinal and transverse 
sound velocities obtained from the shear and bulk 
modulus using Naviers equation 8 9 
The  heat  capacity  can  then  be  calculated  at  any 
temperature from the Debye temperature thus 
The  Gruneisen  parameter 
measure of crystal anharmonicity and can be used 
in  conjunction  with  elastic  constants  to  calculate 
thermal  expansion.  It  is  a  tensor  with  different 
entries  corresponding  to  different  strains.  The 
Guneisen parameter is given by 
expansion  and  V  is  the  molar  volume  and  BT  the 
isothermal bulk modulus. 
the  volume  coefficient 
There  is  a  close  relationship  between  lattice 
thermal conductivity thermal expansion and other 
anharmonicity  of  the  interatomic  potential.  The 
atoms  in  a  crystal  vibrate  about  equilibrium 
the  normal  modes  are  not 
independent  except  in  the  idealised  case  of  a 
harmonic solid. The vibrations of a crystal lattice 
can  be  resolved  into  interacting  travelling  waves 
nonlinear  coupling.  It  should  be  noted  that  in  a  
interchange  energy  due 
  The potential is symmetric 
  There is no thermal expansion 
  Adiabatic and isothermal elastic constants 
  The  elastic  constants  are  independent  of 
pressure and temperature 
  The  heat  capacity  is  constant  at  high 
The  thermal  conductivity    can  be  obtained 
from  knowledge  of  the  heat  capacity  at  constant 
volume Cv the average sound velocity vm and the 
Assuming  an  isotropic  material  the  volume 
coefficient of thermal expansion is given by 
However  in  the  model we describe here we 
have  used  Cv  directly  from  the  GAUSSIAN09 
supermolecule  comprising  the  two  molecules 
used to generate the pair potential. This represents 
the optimized state at the minimum of the potential 
well.  We  have  assumed  that  this  is  a  reasonable 
representation of the solid material of the crystal. 
The heat capacity at constant pressure Cp can also 
be obtained by manipulation of the thermodynamic 
data  by  means  of  the  partition  function  using  the 
rigid rotor  harmonic oscillator approximation. A 
standalone  program  Thermo 
extract  the  data  directly  from  a  GAUSSIAN 
frequency calculation output file10. This allows the 
coefficient  of  thermal  expansion  to  be  calculated 
Thermal  expansion  and  thermal  conductivity 
are  extremely  stringent  tests  of  the  quality  of  an 
interatomic  potential  and  the  model  described 
here. This is because defect energies and structural 
characteristics  of  a  material  are  only  dependent 
upon the potential whilst specific heat and phonon 
density of states are dependent on the second order 
derivatives  of  the  potential.  Thermal  expansion 
and conductivity however are dependent upon the 
third order derivatives of the interatomic potential 
to  atomic  position.  Effective 
interatomic  potentials  are  approximations  of  the 
forces between atoms every time the derivative of 
an approximation is taken any error is magnified. 
Thus the largest errors might be expected to occur 
with  the  prediction  of  thermal  expansion  and 
In the following section we give examples of 
the calculations described above. 
In  order  to  demonstrate  the  principles  of  the 
method  we  have  chosen  a  number  of  common 
explosives as examples. We have used TNT as the 
principal example along with RDX HMX TATB 
and PETN. We begin by describing the results for 
TNT and then describe the collective results for all 
We  begin  by  optimizing  the  structure  of  the 
isolated molecule and determining the phonon and 
thermodynamic  properties  via 
calculation. Care must be taken to choose the right 
starting  configuration  for  the  molecule  to  obtain 
the  correct  molecular  structure  for  a  given 
polymorph. The optimized geometry so obtained is 
used as the input into a pair-wise calculation where 
two  molecules  are  aligned  along  their  dipole.  In 
the case of TNT this means that the methyl groups 
are arranged head-to-tail with the benzene rings in 
the same plane as illustrated in figure 1.  
the distance between the two molecules which are 
held  along  the  fixed  line  of  their  axis.  By  this 
means we obtain the pair potential shown in figure 
2  below.  In  general  it  is  easier  to  start  at  long 
separations  using  relatively 
smaller steps about the minimum.  
Distance between TNT molecules 1xE-10m
Fig.  2.  Potential  energy  plot  for 
molecules  arranged  along  the  axis  of  the  methyl 
Fig.  1.  Two  TNT  molecules  shown  separated 
ready for a potential calculation. 
A  potential  scan  is  then  carried  out  by  changing 
Fig. 3. TNT stress-strain plot. 
The potential can be converted into a stress 
strain plot by calculating the pressure stress and 
the strain change in distance with respect to the  
minimum  energy  position.  The  pressure  is  given 
by the rate of change of energy with volume. The 
latter  can  be  estimated  from  the  cross-sectional 
area  of  the  molecule  and  the  separation  or 
calculated  directly  by  GAUSSIAN09.  We  have 
adopted  the  former  approach  to  allow  rapid 
computation  although  this  is  unlikely  to  be  the 
most  accurate.  The 
tensile  stress-strain  plot 
obtained for TNT is shown in figure 3. The peak 
stress is at 0.39GPa for a strain of 0.14. This does 
not necessarily reflect the bulk behaviour as other 
crystal  orientations  may  have  lower  ultimate 
tensile strength values. 
Table 1. Elastic constants for TNT. 
Calculation  Experiment 
Fig. 4. Variation of Cv with temperature for TNT. 
The initial slope of the stress-strain plot yields 
Youngs  Modulus  the  bulk  modulus  can  be 
obtained  through  equation  2.  Once  these  two 
elastic  constants  have  been  derived  all  the  other 
parameters  can  be  calculated  systematically  by 
exercising equations 3  14. The elastic constants 
and  parameters  calculated  are  compared 
experimental  values  where  available  from  the 
literature in table 111. 
The heat capacity at constant volume Cv can 
be  calculated  directly  from  an  optimization 
followed by a frequency calculation on the super 
molecule.  This  yields  a  value  for  Cv  that  is  a 
reasonable approximation to the solid state rather 
than the gaseous one that is obtained from a single 
molecule  calculation  as  shown 
Knowledge  of  Cv  allows  the  calculation  of  the 
thermal  conductivity  with 
equation 13 as shown in figure 5. 
conductivity with temperature for TNT. 
A  plot  of  shock  velocity  versus  particle 
velocity is shown in figure 6 for shock velocities 
up to 12kms. The plot shows a smooth curve that 
can be approximated to a straight line over a small 
The  coefficients  from  a  linear  fit  to  the  plot 
are given in table 2 according to equation 16. 
5.00E-01 1.00E00 1.50E00 2.00E00 2.50E00 3.00E00
Particle Velocity kms
Fig  6.  Shock  velocity    particle  velocity  plot  for 
Results for all the molecules studied 
We  now  present  the  collective  results  for  all 
the  molecules  we  have  examined  so  far.  These 
include RDX HMX PETN and TATB as well as 
TNT  described  above.  The  full  set  of  results  is 
given in table 2 below. All the data is at 300K and 
atmospheric  pressure  unless  otherwise  stated. 
Where  data  is  available  we  have  attempted  to 
compare our predicted values with experimentally 
determined ones. We have found Dobratz to be the 
main source of such data12. 
If  we  begin  by  comparing 
calculated for both Youngs Modulus and the Bulk 
Modulus  which  were  derived  directly  from  the 
potential we find them broadly in agreement with 
experiment.  For  example  we  calculate  the  bulk 
moduli to be 19.8GPa and 21.3GPa for RDX and 
HMX  compared  to  the  average  experimentally 
determined  values  of  11.99GPa  and  9.90GPa12. 
We  also  calculate  the  shear moduli  for  RDX  and 
HMX to be 3.74GPa and 1.57GPa compared to the 
average  experimental  values  of  7.83GPa  and 
3.70GPa determined by Haycraft13. 
concerning Poissons ratio of the crystals. 
Table 2. Calculated results for TATB TNT RDX HMX and PETN. 
Sound Speed Longtitudinal 
Sound Speed Transverse 
Sound Speed Bulk average 
Shock-Particle Constant A 
Shock-Particle Constant B 
Thermal Conductivity 
Thermal Expansion Coefficient 
Gruneisen Parameter  
8.81 x 10-5  2.93 x 10-4  9.49 x 10-5  6.49 x 10-5  1.13 x 10-4 
experimental ones whereas that predicted for TNT 
is one and a half times larger than the experimental 
data reported in Dobratz12. 
Excellent  agreement 
calculated  specific  heat  at  constant  volume  when 
compared  to  the  experimental  ones  published  in 
Data  on  the  Gruneisen  parameter  has  also 
been  determined.  The  Gruneisen  parameter  is 
expected to be around unity the RDX value is 1.1 
which appears consistent with this. For TATB we 
obtain a value of 2.0 which is also plausible. The 
remainder TNT HMX and PETN give values of 
less  than  one.  However  Arienti  et.  al.  appear  to 
agree with our prediction of 0.7 for HMX.  
In  this  paper  we  have  presented  a  simple 
model with which it is possible to estimate a range 
of  thermodynamic  and  mechanical  parameters 
from  a  simple  pair  potential  between 
interaction of two identical molecules. The results 
obtained  suggest  that  our  original  assumptions 
about  van  Der  Waals  treatment  is  sufficient  to 
obtain mechanical and thermal properties in broad 
agreement with experimental values.  
We  have  only  examined  one  possible 
description  of  the  basis  function  and  it  would  be 
interesting  to  examine  others  to  see  if  the  model 
predictions could be improved via a more accurate 
description of the potential. Furthermore it would 
also  be  informative  to  calculate  the  molecular 
volume  and  thereby  the  change  in  molecule 
GAUSSIAN09 reducing any errors introduced by 
the approximation employed in this work.  
the  potential  directly 
The  method  described  here  allows  the  rapid 
systematic examination of interactions in different 
molecular  arrangements.  It  is  complimentary  to 
other  quantum  chemical  methods  that  employ 
plane  wave  treatments  of  the  wave  function  and 
techniques  such  as  Molecular  Dynamics  and 
Monte  Carlo  simulations 
contributions  over  a  wide  number  of  atoms  and 
The  experimentally  determined  sound  speeds 
for  RDX  HMX  TNT  and  TATB  are  given  in 
Dobratz12. There appears to be some variability in 
the data. The LASL Shock Hugoniot Data Manual 
authored  by  Marsh14  gives  values  of 
longtitudinal  sound  speeds  in  PETN  TATB  and 
TNT  of  2.82kms  1.98kms  2.48kms  and 
transverse  sound  speeds  of  1.48kms  1.16kms 
1.34kms respectively.   
While there appears to be some uncertainty in 
the  experimental  values  the  calculated  data  is 
broadly  in  line  with  the  reported  experimental 
ones most being a little low. Our calculated sound 
speeds  for  HMX  and  TATB  appear  a  little  high 
compared to the data in Dobratz. 
Menikoff  3  gives  a  longitudinal  sound  speed 
value for HMX of 2.74kms compared to our value 
of 3.5kms. However Arrenti et al15 give a sound 
speed  of  3.07kms.  Our  calculated  values  are 
within 20 of the experimental bounds apart from 
the predicted longtitudinal sound speed for TATB 
which  appears  slightly  high.  Errors 
calculation  of  the  bulk  and  Youngs  moduli  may 
account for this difference.  
As  far  as  the  shock  velocityparticle  velocity 
data  is  concerned  we  obtain  reasonable  forms  of 
the  curves.  We  have  compared  our  predictions 
with LASL13 data and find that for a given shock 
velocity the particle velocity appears to be too low 
sometimes  by  as  much  as  a  factor  of  three.  The 
reasons  for  this  are  not  entirely  clear.  It  may  be 
that  errors  in  the  calculated  molecular  volume 
changes  could  contribute  to  the  under  estimation 
of  the  particle  velocity.    The  molecular  volume 
changes have been derived from estimations of the 
effective  area  presented  between  the  molecules 
and a parameter adjustment study of the molecule 
dimensions  has  suggested  that  this  is  a  possible 
source  of  the  error.  However  adjusting  for  the 
unreacted  Hugoniot  appears  to  also  reduce  the 
magnitude of the predicted elastic constants.  
the  prediction  of 
properties  for  thermal  conductivity  we  find  that 
the predictions for TATB TNT and HMX appear 
to  be  in  good  agreement  with  the  experimentally 
determined data given in Dobratz12. However the 
compared  with  our  prediction.  The  model 
prediction for the thermal expansion coefficient for 
HMX  RDX  and  PETN  appear  to  be  half  the Formulation-Derived Interface Characteristics Contributing to Failure in Plastic
Bonded Explosive Materials 
John D. Yeager1 Kyle J. Ramos1 Daniel E. Hooks2 Jaroslaw Majewski3 and Saurabh Singh3 
1 Shock and Detonation Physics 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 
2 Weapons Experiments 
3 Los Alamos Neutron Science Center LANSCE Lujan Center 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 
Abstract.  Molecular  composites  such  as  plastic-bonded  explosives  PBX  exhibit 
complex anisotropic deformation in response to most thermal and mechanical stimuli. The 
anisotropic response is driven by the constituent materials and the microstructure of the 
composite specifically bulk deformation and fracture events are often influenced by the 
mesoscale mechanisms of crystal deformation and crystal-binder interfacial failure. Here 
we used a combination of neutron reflectometry and ellipsometry to measure with high 
precision the crystal-binder interfacial chemistry for several PBXs of interest determining 
composition  as  a  function  of  distance  from  the  crystal  into  the  binder.  Selected  PBX 
materials were then probed mechanically with nanoindentation to assess the true effect of 
the measured interfacial composition and structure on deformation and fracture behavior. 
For  example  inclusion  of  a  plasticizing  agent  in  one  formulation  altered  the  chemical 
composition of the interface structure and resulted in a weaker crystal-binder bond.  
Plastic-bonded explosives PBX are complex 
composites  comprised  of  micron-sized  energetic 
crystals in a polymer matrix. PBX response to offnormal stimuli such as low strain rate mechanical 
deformation  is  often  complex  and  difficult  to 
predict  due  to  inherent  difficulties  in  measuring 
deformation  and  failure  characteristics.  Such 
deformation  is  necessarily  a  function  of  both  the 
constituent  materials  and 
the  microstructure. 
Extensive research has been performed historically 
on  the  thermo-mechanical  properties  of  various 
binders and PBXs with focus on how deformation 
that  have  been  manufactured 
processes  affect  sensitivity  and  deflagration  or 
detonation  initiation  of  the  material.1-5  Generally 
is  performed  on  PBX 
most  experimentation 
specification in order to most closely mimic actual 
PBX  properties.  For  example  researchers  have 
examined  the  effect  of  average  defect  structure 
such as pore size distribution in as-formulated and 
intentionally damaged PBXs and made inferences 
and sometimes direct observation as to the location 
of  the  pores  within  the  structure  and  subsequent 
effects  on  properties.6-8  Recently  we  have  begun 
experiments  to  isolate  individual  mechanisms  for 
focused  study  in  order  to  understand  the  specific 
processes  which  underpin  bulk  response  and  also 
to  support  the  development  of  mesoscale  models 
which  incorporate  grain-level  data.  The  elasticplastic 
explosives  was  extensively 
nanoindentation  to  quantify  anisotropic  elastic 
properties  plastic 
characteristics that contribute to for example poor 
sample  manufacturability  and 
energy  leading  to  initiation  of  detonation.9  10 
Yielding  events  involving  dislocation-mediated 
plasticity were shown to exhibit sensitivity to the 
underlying  defect  density  within  the  crystals 
microstructure.  The  conclusion  was  that  changes 
in  the  extent  of  elastic  loading  prior  to  yielding 
could affect the stiffness of inter-granular contacts 
In addition to characterization of the energetic 
constituents  formulation-derived  chemical  and 
microstructural effects have been investigated with 
novel application of established techniques such as 
reflectometry  and  ellipsometry.  The 
crystal-binder  interface  is  of  particular  interest 
because the literature has shown that the interface 
is  a  preferred  location  for  crack  initiation  and 
propagation  for  several  PBX  materials  11  12  and 
likely  affect  reactive  processes.13  14  To  quantify 
the deformation and failure processes and to link 
these  mechanisms  to  formulation  processes  we 
have  performed  several  experiments  focusing  on 
the  crystal-binder  interface  following  simulated 
formulation procedures.  
The  primary  purpose  of  this  report  is  to 
summarize and highlight the work we have done in 
this area over the last several years. We reference 
complete publications on specific materials where 
applicable  but  also  include  some  new  data  and 
analysis. In addition to drawing several interesting 
conclusions  on  particular  PBXs  this  compilation 
of results from multiple materials ideally can shed 
light  on  commonalities  between  interfaces  in 
various  PBXs  and  the  critical  importance  of 
Experimental Methods 
All PBX materials discussed in this report are 
in  Table  1.  Molecular  crystals  were 
recrystallized several times from stock materials to 
the  purity.  Binders  were  generally 
obtained  from  the  manufacturer  directly.  In  the 
case  of  Composition  A-3  the  polyethylene  wax 
was provided as an emulsion by Holston.  
Table 1.  Studied PBX materials. 
PVP  polyvinylpyrrolidone 
HMX - cyclotetramethylene-tetranitramine 
NP  nitroplasticizer  eutectic  mixture  of  bis22-dinitropropyl 
and  Bis-22dinitropropyl formal BDNPAF 
RDX  cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine 
CEF  tris2-chloroethyl phosphate 
DPA - diphenylamine 
In order to study the crystal-binder interface in 
detail simplified yet representative samples of the 
real  PBX  needed  to  be  formulated.  Most  of  the 
PBXs  studied  here  use  a  slurry  formulation 
large-scale  production.  The  HE 
crystals of appropriate size are suspended in water 
and then mixed with a polymer solution. Typically 
the polymer solution consists of polymer binder in 
an  organic  solvent  but  Composition  A-3  uses  a 
polyethylene  emulsion  instead.  After  the  two 
solutions are mixed the water alters the solubility 
conditions of the polymer causing it to crash out 
of solution and coat the crystals to make molding 
prills. Residual liquid is removed by a combination 
of suction and drying processes and then the dried 
prills  can  be  pressed  to  shape.  The  resulting 
composite  PBX  has  a  complex  microstructure 
which  is  determined  by  formulation  parameters 
e.g.  mixing  time  temperature  for  drying  and 
properties of the constituent materials. 
To  simulate  this  slurry  process  we  use  dipcoating  to  create  layered  films  of  crystal  and 
binder. The materials including solvents used in 
the coating are the same as in the production of the 
actual  PBX  and  so  the  interactions  between  the 
the  same.  The  HE  films  are 
polycrystalline representing the randomly oriented 
the  PBX  microstructure  so 
measurements of the film as a whole are similar to 
bulk  measurements.  An  example  of  the  resulting 
microstructure  of  the  layered  film  samples  is 
shown  in  Figure  1.  Figure  1  is  a  polarized  light 
micrograph of a polycrystalline HMX film coated 
with nitrocellulose NC showing several distinct 
microstructures.  Here  HMX  was  partially  coated 
with  NC  from  right  to  left.  Region  I  is  the  bare 
HMX.  Region  II  darker  shows  a  vertical  line 
which is the edge of the NC coating. Region III is 
a  relatively  uniform  layer  of  NC  coating  HMX 
and the striations are noticeably thinner or weaker. 
Region  IV  shows  total  dissolution  of  the  striated 
HMX  structure  with  some 
observable.  Region  V  appears  to  be  homogenous 
recrystallization  nuclei  or  perhaps  none  at  all. 
These regions form as a result of the solubility of 
HMX in the NC solvent ethyl acetate probably 
influenced by the NC itself as the film dries. It is 
clear  that  the  known  interactions  between  the 
polymer  solvent  and  HE  materials  in  PBX 
formulation are mimicked with this sequential dipcoating process.  
Fig.  1.  Optical  micrograph  of  dip-coated  HMX 
polycrystalline  film  region  I  coated  with  NC 
showing  the  competing  processes  of  dissolution 
difference between I II and III recrystallization 
IV and intermixing V. 
Neutron  reflectometry  is  a  somewhat  similar 
technique  to  ellipsometry  except  the  probing 
particles  are  neutrons  and  the  film  parameters 
which  affect  the  reflected    neutrons  intensity 
determined by neutron scattering cross-section i.e. 
composition  and  atomic  volume  i.e.  density. 
The  data  is  modeled  in  a  similar  fashion  to 
complementary and in general we have found that 
ellipsometry  is  better  for  moderately-resolved 
characterization  of  simple  film  systems  while 
measurements  of  compositional  variation  within 
complex  samples.17  This  reflects  the  fact  that 
ellipsometry  is  easily  performed  with  benchtop 
instrumentation  while  neutron 
requires  high  flux  sources  such  as  spallation 
sources or reactors. 
Intermixing or other interactions between the 
materials  are  studied  with  a  combination  of 
techniques.  Surface  energies  of  constituent 
materials  are  determined  by  contact  angle 
measurements as in Yeager et al.15 and values for 
the  work  of  adhesion  between  materials  are 
calculated.  Ellipsometry  was  performed  using  a 
Woollam variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometer 
WVASE J. A. Woollam Co. Inc as described in 
Theeten  and  Aspnes.16  Briefly  for  these  samples 
ellipsometry  measures  the  change  in  polarization 
of  light  after  reflection  from  the  layered  film 
system.  The  precise  changes  in  the  phase  and 
amplitude  of  the  light  are  a  function  of  the 
complex  index  of  refraction  of  each  layer  of  the 
sample and the interactions between the layers. A 
model construction of the sample is generated and 
certain  parameters  of  the  construction  mainly 
thickness  uniformity  and  index  of  refraction  of 
each layer are modified iteratively by the software 
to reproduce the data.  
Nanoindentation experiments were carried out 
on several samples using a Hysitron TriboIndenter 
Minneapolis  MN  USA  with  a 
transducer  and  an  included  AFM.  Indents  were 
made with a conical diamond indenter tip and the 
tip  was  calibrated  using  quartz  and  aluminum 
the  usual  Oliver  and  Pharr  
indentation method 18.  
energies  were  determined  by 
measuring  contact  angles  of  various  liquids  not 
reported here on the surface of the PBX materials. 
Table  2  lists  polar  dispersive  and  total  surface 
energy for selected materials along with literature 
values  where  appropriate.  The  work  of  adhesion 
WA  is  calculated  by  the  Owens  and  Wendt 
method.19  WA  is  not  a  practical  measure  for 
total  adhesion  between  materials 
because it does not account for energy absorbed by 
the  materials  during  deformation  i.e.  through 
deformation  but  it  is  useful  here  because  it 
indicates  which  materials  preferentially  bond  to 
each other during a formulation process.  
The interfacial parameters reported in Table 2 
are included for reference but have more practical 
value  for  theoretical  scenarios  i.e.  molecular 
dynamics  simulations  of  atomically  smooth 
surfaces20.  However 
analyzing  the  reflectometry  results.  For  example 
the nitroplasticizer does not significantly affect the 
interactions  between  Estane  and  HMX  so  any 
observed  interfacial  differences  between  LX-14 
and  PBX  9501  are  more  likely  due  to  interphase 
behavior and not secondary bonding. By contrast 
homogeneous  polyethylene  wax  behaves  quite 
differently  than  wax  formed  from  drying  the 
emulsion.  Thus  the  interface  is  affected  by  the 
emulsion ingredients as well as the polyethylene.  
Effect of Solvent and Additives in Mock Material 
that  all  films  were  prepared  by  sequential  dipcoating  of  the  materials  onto  silicon  substrates. 
The SLD profiles in Figure 2 can be thought of as 
composition profiles wherein the effects of density 
and  composition  are  combined.  Features  of  the 
profile with constant SLD over some thickness are 
sample  with  homogeneous 
composition  whereas 
homogeneous regions are indicative of interfaces.  
The  interface  in  ACM-PVP  from  ethanol 
actually  has  a  uniform  composition  for  7-10  nm 
which is often called an interphase in materials 
science.  The  interphase  or  intermixing  region 
disappears  as  methanol  is  introduced.  The  ACM 
region also shrinks slightly while the PVP region 
does  not  change  significantly.  The  conclusion 
from  this  experiment  is  that  the  interface  is 
formulation  process.  Also  it  may  be  possible  to 
tailor  or  design  an 
interface  by  selecting 
appropriate chemicals or formulation parameters. 
The  addition  of  a  plasticizer  also  seemed 
likely  to  influence  the  interface.  Plasticizers  are 
typically  monomers  or  short-chain  polymers  so 
they diffuse throughout the composite much more 
easily than the main polymer in most scenarios.21 
We first studied this effect with mock PBX 9501 
and mock LX-14 using ACM in place of HMX.22 
Figure  3  shows  the  resulting  SLD  profiles  along 
with  a  textual  description  of  the  composition 
through the thickness of the material. The principal 
finding  was  that  the  ACM  dissolved  into  the 
Estane likely partially due to the butanone solvent 
for  the  Estane  but  that  when  the  NP  was 
the  dissolution  or 
intermixing process. The NP tended to concentrate 
at  the  interface  similar  observations  had  been 
made by other researchers using only the binder.23 
The effect of the type of solvent used in wet or 
slurry  formulation  is  shown  in  Figure  2.17  ACM 
was formulated with PVP using ethanol methanol 
and a 11 mixture of ethanol and methanol. Recall 
Table 2. Surface energies dyncm for various binders as dispersive d polar p and total   and WA. 
Polyethylene Wax pure 
Polyethylene Wax from emulsion 
Reference Materials 
HMX average value from Yee25 
Fig.  2.  SLD  profile  for  ACM-PVP  samples 
formulated from three solvents. 
Case Studies in Slurry Formulated PBX Materials 
ACM  is  somewhat  similar  to  HMX  in  terms 
of solubility and crystal structure. HMX solubility 
in  Estane  and  NPEstane  has  previously  been 
suspected1  and  the  particle  size  distribution  of 
HMX  in  recovered  PBX  9501  munitions  was 
skewed  towards  smaller  diameters  although  this 
latter  observation  is  undoubtedly  also  due  to  the 
for  molding  prills.26  We 
endeavored  to  discover  if  these  processes  were 
occurring  in  PBX  9501  and  LX-14.  While  there 
are  notable  differences  in  HMX  particle  size 
distribution between PBX 9501 and LX-14 for the 
purposes  of  studying 
difference  between 
presence of the NP.  
these  materials  was 
In addition to the neutron reflectometry study 
of these materials we also used nanoindentation to 
probe  the  mechanical  response  of  the  crystals  to 
sharp  tips.27  Here  the  binders  were  dip-coated 
onto  single  crystals  of  HMX  which  had  been 
grown  from  acetone.  By  indenting  the  single 
the  dip-coated  binder  we 
simulated  the  inter-granular  contacts  which  occur 
and cause cracking  during molding prill pressing 
operations.  Figure  4  shows  the  SLD  results  from 
neutron  reflectometry  along  with  corresponding 
AFM  imaging  of  the  residual  deformation  in  the 
indented area of the composite.  
Fig.  3.  SLD  profiles  for  ACM-Estane  top  and 
ACM-NPEstane bottom. 
The  reflectometry  showed  that  the  HMX 
tended  to  dissolve  some  distance  into  the  Estane 
binder  in  a  similar  manner  to  the  ACM  samples. 
Likewise the NP in the NPEstane binder tended 
to  segregate  at  the  HMX-binder  interface  and 
nanoindentation  experiments  showed  that  the  two 
types of interfaces exhibited different deformation 
mechanisms  under  point  loading.  The  HMXEstane  system  accommodated  all  of  the  stress  of 
the  indentation  into  plastic  deformation  of  the 
binder  and  of  the  crystal  and  likely  also  through 
some cracking of the crystal. However the HMXNPEstane  system  preferentially  cracked  laterally 
along  the  interface  and  delaminated  the  binder. 
This  difference  in  fracture  behavior  may  be 
important in the development of hot spot locations 
during  pressing  which 
Fig. 4. SLD profiles for PBX 9501 and LX-14 thin film samples along with corresponding nanoindentation 
experimental results. The inclusion of the nitroplasticizer alters the interface and changes the fracture 
mechanism to favor binder delamination.
embrittlement and age-related degradation.  
While  AFM  was  necessary  to  identify  the 
damaged regions in the explosive samples similar 
indentation  experiments  on 
samples showed even more dramatic effects. Here 
the resulting blisters or delamination zones around 
the indents in the ACM-NPEstane were visible by 
microscopy Figure 5. 
A  similar  interfacial  structure  was  observed 
when examining PBX 9404 though these samples 
have  not  yet  been  tested  mechanically.  Figure  6 
shows  the  SLD  profiles  of  the  PBX  9404  binder 
and  the  HMX-binder  samples.  Here  we  see 
migration  of  the  plasticizer  to  the  substrate  or 
HMX surface but also see concentrations at the air 
interface. These results indicate that the plasticizer 
in  NC  tends  to  migrate  out  of  the  main  phase  of 
binder  and  towards  the  interfaces.  This  is  not 
unexpected 28 and may help explain some of the  
Fig.  5.  Blisters  or  delamination  zones  formed  in 
NPEstane  binder  around  residual  indents  into 
single crystal ACM. 
The resulting composition profile has several 
features of  note  Figure 7. First  the  RDX clearly 
forms an intermixing region with the polyethylene 
binder.  This  region 
considered a homogeneous interphase. Second the 
binder SLD is constant but it is much higher than 
expected SLD should be 0.05. This means that 
the  bulk  binder  also  contains  some  solid-solution 
RDX.  There  are  two  possible  explanations  1 
RDX  has  some  solubility  in  residual  emulsion 
chemical morpholine so RDX could be dissolved 
into the binder 2 the pH of the emulsion solution 
was  10  and  RDX  is  known  to  hydrolyze  or 
otherwise  degrade  in  very  basic  solutions30  so 
molecular  fragments  of  RDX  could  be  migrating 
into the binder in the layered film sample. 
Fig. 7. SLD profile for Composition A-3 showing 
significant  intermixing  between  the  RDX  and  the 
Extrudable Explosives 
If the primary driving force for intermixing in 
the  slurry  or  emulsion  formulated  PBXs  is  the 
solubility of the explosive in the binder and  or the 
solvent  then  it  stands  to  reason  that  simpler 
explosives  would  not  exhibit  such  complex 
interfacial  interactions.  This  theory  was  tested  by 
studying  the  extrudable  explosive  XTX-8004 
which  is  RDX  based  with  a  silicone  binder 
Sylgard 182. The composition profile is given in 
Figure  8.  XTX  is  formulated  by  mixing  the  two 
components of Sylgard 182 together and stirring in 
RDX  crystals  of  a  specific  particle  size  and 
distribution.  The  small  amount  of  solvent  in  the 
Sylgard resin evaporates almost immediately or is 
Fig.  6.  SLD  profiles  for  PBX  9404  binder 
Binder  and  HMX-9404  binder  composite 
In  the  PBX  sample  the  HMX  is  apparently 
more soluble in the 9404 binder than it was in the 
9501  binder  and  the  original  HMX  film  is 
completely  dissolved.  This  reinforces  the  larger 
scale observation in Figure 1 where the majority 
of  the  film  was  apparently  dissolved  into  the 
nitrocellulose binder. HMX has a higher SLD than 
any of the binder components and so is revealed in 
the  higher  SLD  for  the  region  between  SiO2  and 
NCCEF along with the slightly higher SLD for 
the  bulk  polymer  region.  More  comprehensive 
studies in this subject area are planned. 
Emulsion-Based Formulation 
the  emulsion  process  yields 
Composition A-3 is an RDX-based explosive 
which is formulated with emulsified polyethylene 
wax.  In  general  this  is  similar  to  the  slurry 
processes used in the other materials studied in this 
additional  complication  of  potential 
emulsifying chemicals after the material has been 
fabricated. Recall that Table 2 showed evidence of 
the emulsion chemicals being more attracted to the 
Preliminary analysis with spectroscopic techniques 
morpholine  could  be  found  in  both  the  dried 
emulsion  and  actual  molding  prills  provided  by 
consumed  by  the  chemical  reaction  between  the 
Sylgard components. Here a very small interface 
between the RDX and the binder is seen which is 
on  the  order  of  the  roughness  of  the  film.  The 
interface  has  a  SLD  value  which  is  intermediate 
between the crystal and binder but this is expected 
for rough samples. The Sylgard 182 has a very low 
SLD indicating little-to-no RDX diffusion into the 
bulk  of  the  polymer.  The  composition  of  the 
interface is thus due to physical intermixing of the 
two  materials  such  as  Sylgard  filling  in  gaps 
between rough RDX crystallites. 
Fig. 8. SLD profile for XTX 8004. The interface is 
very  small  on  the  order  of  2-3  nm  which  is 
consistent with the roughness of the film. 
An  estimate  of  the  surface  area  of  HMX 
crystals in PBX 9501 reveals that a golf ball-sized 
piece  of  the  PBX  contains  over  1  m2  of  crystalbinder interfacial area due to the very small size of 
the  particles.  It  is  clear  that  small  changes  in 
formulation  conditions  can  drastically  alter  the 
interface  between  explosive  crystals  and 
polymer binders and that these interfacial changes 
can affect mechanical properties. The high surface 
areas  in  PBX  materials  indicate  that  larger  scale 
properties  such  as  sensitivity  reliability  thermal 
stability and perhaps even detonation performance 
could all be affected by the interface. For example 
Composition  A-3  in  particular  is  a  historically 
notorious  material  for  maintaining  quality  control 
batch-to-batch  and  between  slightly  different 
formulation  recipes  usually  attributed  to  lack  of 
surface coverage of the RDX crystals by the wax.31 
The  complicated  interactions  between  various 
emulsion  chemicals  the  pH  of  the  emulsion  and 
the  properties  of  the  RDX  and  wax  binder  are 
likely to be responsible. In other cases plasticizer 
migration  and  segregation  while  not  always  an 
interface  effect  certainly  contribute  to  long-term 
embrittlement or other aging behavior in multiple 
PBX  materials.  However  the  implications  for 
sensitivity  are  perhaps  most  critical.  Current  hot 
theory  suggests  several  microstructural 
mechanisms for initiation in PBXs. The worst or 
most  likely  to  cause  initiation  is  when  cracks  are 
individual  explosive  crystals 
leading to friction and heat being generated under 
small  mechanical  forces  as  the  crystal-crystal 
interfaces  rub  together.  We  show  here  that  this 
type of failure mechanism is reduced in PBX 9501 
because the plasticizer weakens the crystal-binder 
interface.  Thus  it  is  more  energetically  favorable 
for  the  crack  to  propagate  laterally  along  the 
interface  than  through  the  crystal.  The  possibility 
exists to tailor or design the interface of any PBX 
material in such a way as to create diffuse or sharp 
interfaces  between  the  explosive  and  the  binder. 
Knowledge  of  how  the  formulation  processes 
affect  microstructural  elements  that  give  rise  to 
continuum  response  is  critical  in  design  of  new 
Of  course  the  formulation  of  true  PBX 
materials  is  complicated  and  involves  multiple 
parameters which cannot be replicated by the film 
samples  used  here.  However  every  effort  was 
taken  to  allow  the  film  systems  to  represent  the 
PBXs in terms of materials used multi-component 
mixtures  polycrystallinity  etc.  At  a  minimum 
these  results  clarify  previously  unquantifiable 
hypotheses  and  anecdotal  observations  in  the 
literature  while  providing  possible  mechanisms 
for observed large-scale properties.  
This type of research could also be useful for 
the  development  of  multiscale  or  mesoscale 
models. Often simulations that involve interfaces 
assume  that  the  materials  are  atomically  smooth 
and  that  the  interface  is  discrete  rather  than  a 
unique  phase  with  unique  and  even  graded 
properties.  Bonding  between 
materials  is  usually  secondary  and  interdiffusion 
between the materials is generally not allowed. We 
have shown here that these model parameters are 
not representative of the true PBXs.  
We  demonstrate  that  formulation  parameters 
such  as  solvent  solvent-binder 
additives  mixing  time  and  pH  can  all  affect  the 
size  and  composition  of  the  interface  between 
explosive  crystals  and  binders.  These  data  help 
hypotheses  in  the  literature.  The  implications  of 
this  work  include  the  possibility  of  engineering  a 
specific  type  of  interface  to  alter  sensitivity  or 
small-scale  properties.  At  the  very  least  widely 
used PBX materials can be studied and contrasted 
now in terms of their interfacial structure. We find 
that more complicated formulation processes tend 
to  lead  towards  more  complicated  interfaces 
advantageous. Finally these types of data could be 
incorporated  into  multi-scale  models  and  may 
assist in developing new explosive composites. Invetigation of Micro- Meso- and Macrostructure of the Pressed Parts Made of HE 
Liaisan Kh. Badretdinova1 Konstantin A. Ten2 Eduard R. Pruuel2 Leonid A. Lukyanchikov2  
Boris P. Tolochko3 Marat R. Sharafutdinov3 Alexander N. Shmakov4 Alexander K. Muzyrya5  
Oleg V. Kostitsyn5 Ewgeny B. Smirnov5 Konstantin E. Kuper6 
1Kazan National ResearchTechnological University Kazan Russia 
2 Lavrentiev Institute of Hydrodynamics RAS Siberian Branch Novosibirsk Russia 
3 Institute of Solid State Chemistry and Mechanochemistry RAS Siberian Branch Novosibirsk Russia 
4 Boreskov Institute of Catalysis RAS Siberian Branch Novosibirsk Russia 
5 Russian Federal Nuclear Center  Zababakhin AllRussia Research Institute of Technical Physics 
Chelyabinsk region Snezhinsk Russia 
6 Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics RAS Siberian Branch Novosibirsk Russia 
Abstract. The molecular structure of individual explosives was studied with the help of 
diffraction  methods  XRD  including  the  case  with  the  varying  initial  conditions.  The 
small angle X-ray scattering method SAXS was used to study the structure porosity in 
the range of 1-10 nm. The structure with the size ranging from 0.001-10 mm was studied 
with  the  help  of  the  X-ray  computer  microtomography  XRCT.  The  data  on  the 
morphology  of  the  HE  structure  inhomogenuities  were  gathered  with  the  help  of  the 
electron EMS and optical microscopy OMS.   
The  present-day  understanding  states  that  a 
explosion  products  begins  at  the  front  of  the 
homogeneous  mechanism  and  continues  behind 
the front according to the local-thermal mechanism 
decomposition of an explosive material HE at the 
its  molecular  and 
intermolecular  structures  with  their  characteristic 
sizes being within the subnanometer area. A share 
of an explosive decomposed at the front decreases 
with the external action intensity. And the role of 
local-thermal  mechanism 
grows in the process of initiation. In addition the 
shock wave induces local elevated temperatures  
hot  spots    on  inhomogeneities  of  the  micro- 
meso-  and  macrostructure  inside  HE  due  to 
energy  dissipation.  Elevated  temperatures  create 
favorable  conditions  for  the  chemical  reaction  to 
commence in heated up areas and to propagate to 
the  surrounding  substance.  Different  mechanisms 
are discussed in publications as possible reasons of 
heat localization. But intricacy of the phenomenon 
of  explosive  transformation  initiation  prevents  us 
from  focusing  on  one  of  them.  By  no  means 
unimportant  is  that  changes in  loading  conditions 
in  mechanisms  whose 
combined  action  predetermines 
Nowadays  phenomenological  models  of  HE 
decomposition  kinetics  are  widely  used.  These 
models  are  based  on  the  quantitative  interrelation 
between  the  structure  inhomogeneities  and  the 
explosives to external stimuli. Without going into 
details  of  mechanisms  themselves  it  is  assumed 
inhomogeneity  size  i.e.  a  pore  size  and  energy 
accumulated in this pore due to compression. The 
fact that heat removal is proportional to the surface 
area  of  a  heated  pore  is  also  taken  into  account. 
The  mathematical  model  of  HE  decomposition 
kinetics  which  is  constructed  based  on  these 
assumptions  strongly  needs  actual  data  on  the 
inhomogeneities  distribution  inside  an  explosive 
material.  Verification  of  these  models  requires 
empirical  data  both  on  the  molecular  structure  of 
HE  and  on  the  heterogeneous  structure  of  an  HE 
charge.  In  its  turn  the  heterogeneous  structure 
depends on the fabrication process and undergoes 
changes at mechanical and thermal impacts on HE. 
The  whole  of  inhomogeneities  in  the  HE  charge 
structure  can  be  conventionally  subdivided  into 
intracrystalline 1-100 nm intragranular 0.1-100 
intergranular  0.1-10  mm  classes. 
Therefore in order to construct the physical model 
of  HE  decomposition  kinetics  we  need 
information on the structure in the range from the 
molecular  structure  with  characteristic  sizes  of 
about  10-10 m  to  the  HE  macrostructure  with 
characteristic sizes up to 10-2 m. 
heterogeneous  explosives  was  studied  with  the 
Fig. 1. Methods used to study structure of explosives. 
Our  investigations  covered  a  wide  range  of 
structure  changes  from  units  of  Angstrem  up  to 
millimeters. The molecular structure of individual 
explosives was studied with the help of diffraction 
methods  XRD  including  the  case  with  the 
initial  conditions 
pressure  applied  to  explosives.  The  small  angle 
X-ray  scattering  method  SAXS  was  used  to 
study the structure porosity in the range of 1-10 
nm.  The  structure  with  the  size  ranging  from 
0.001-10 mm was studied with the help of the Xray computer microtomography XRCT. Sizes in 
the range from 0.01 to 1 m can be studied with 
the  help  of  the  ultra  small  angle  X-ray  scattering 
method USAXS. The data on the morphology of 
the  HE  structure  inhomogenuities  were  gathered 
with  the  help  of  the  electron  EMS  and  optical 
The applied XRD SAXS and XRTC methods 
use  a  monochromatic  beam  of  synchrotron 
radiation  SR  from  an  electron-positron  collider. 
The application of synchrotron radiation makes it 
possible to achieve high levels of X-ray exposure 
within  a  short  period  of 
continuous  recording  of  physical-and-chemical 
phenomena  in  a  real-time  mode.  Small  angle 
divergence  of  synchrotron  radiation  makes  this 
measurements.  Lawrence  Livermore  National 
Laboratory  was  the  pioneer  to  use  synchrotron 
radiation for the internal HE structure investigation 
3  4.  Argonne  National  Laboratory  used 
Advanced  Photon  Source  to  gather  the  data  on 
initial  structure  of  LX-17  4  5.  In  our  country 
synchrotron  radiation  was  first  used  for  these 
purposes on VEPP-3 accelerator at the Institute of 
Nuclear  Physics  RAS  Siberian  Branch.  On  this 
accelerator the source of synchrotron radiation is a 
wiggler  having  the  field  of  2  T.  The  synchrotron 
radiation  of  this  wiggler  has  the  continuum 
spectrum  with  critical  wavelength  of    2.33   
and total power of 103 W.   
This  paper  gives  results  of  investigating  the 
135-triamino-246trinitrobenzene.   Taken alone and in combination 
with  plasticizers  this  HE  is  of  great  scientific 
interest  due  to  its  exclusively  low  sensitivity  to 
external stimuli both heat and shock. At the same 
time it is extremely attractive in terms of scientific 
research  because  of 
its  complex  crystalline 
structure.  TATB  crystals  have  triclinic  symmetry 
being a challenge for the X-ray structural analysis. 
While  studying  such  materials  as  TATB  one 
should  draw  attention  to  the  directed  dependence 
of their thermal and mechanical properties because 
of intrinsic anisotropy of the triclinic system.  
 Molecular  structure  of  an  individual  HE 
namely  TATB  typical  size  of  0.1-1nm 
investigated  by  the  powder  X-ray  diffraction 
method  including  hydrostatic  compression  of  the 
explosive in diamond anvils. Fig. 2 shows TATB 
diffractogram  registered  under  normal  conditions. 
In  this  figure  the  radiation  scattering  angle  is 
plotted  along  the  x-axis  and  radiation  intensity  I 
in arbitrary units is plotted along the y-axis.  
Fig.  2.  TATB  diffractogram 
atmospheric  pressure  and  293.  X-ray  quanta 
The TATB unit cell sizes calculated based on 
the  X-ray  analysis  during  this  work  are  in  good 
agreement with the results given in 8. The TATB 
unit cell geometry is shown in Fig. 3. 
Fig. 3.  TATB crystal unit cell. 
Investigation  of  isothermal  compression  in 
combination  with  the  data  on  shock  adiabatic 
phenomena  as  phase  transitions  melting  under 
shock  loading  and  detonation  initiation.  This 
paper considers TATB compression approximately 
up  to  5  GPa  at  T    293K.  The  dffraction  signal 
was  registered  using  a  detecting  system  based  on 
MarResearch  image  plate.  The  energy  of  X-ray 
quanta was E33.7 keV 9.  
Up  to  ten  diffraction  peaks  were  registered  at 
atmospheric  pressure  Fig.  2 
sufficient  for  triclinic  system  analysis.  However 
the number of registered peaks decreased down to 
four  peaks  when  the  pressure  grew  up  to  5  GPa. 
Fig.  4  shows  TATB  diffractograms  for  several 
levels of compression. 
Fig. 5. Data on TATB isothermal compression. 
For  comparison  these  data  are  shown  along 
with appropriate data obtained by other researchers 
8 10 11. In the pressure range under study our 
data agree well with the results of 8 10. The data 
on  the  HE  isothermal  compression  are  needed  to 
construct  the  equation  of  state.  In  addition  these 
investigations  provide  valuable  information  on 
how  molecular  structure  changes  under  external 
stimuli  pressure  and  temperature  including  the 
case when they approach the critical level. For this 
purpose present-day study involves wider pressure 
range as well as conditions of isobaric heating. 
The  small  angle  X-ray  scattering  method 
SAXS  was  used  to  study  the  structure  of 
heterogeneous  explosive  charges.  Generally  this 
method  is  similar  to  the  X-ray  diffraction  XRD 
method  except  that  the  small  angle  diffraction 
inhomogeneities. Instead of scattering from atomic 
planes this method registers scatter for randomly 
distributed air pores in the HE matrix these pores 
are  the  primary  source  of  small-angle  scattering. 
Figure  6  shows  profiles  of  the  small  angle  SR 
scattering  intensity  for  TATB  with  the  initial 
porosity  of    1  at  T  293K.  This  figure  also 
shows  the  data  on  SAXS  intensity  for  TATB 
heated  up  to  250.  The  SAXS  signal  grows 
significantly with temperature.  
Fig.  4.  TATB  diffractograms  for  the  case  of 
isothermal  compression.  X-ray  quanta  energy 
Minimum  six  diffraction  peaks  need  to  be 
registered  in  order  to  calculate  TATB  unit  cell 
parameters. For triclinic system an assumption of 
TATB  unit  cell  behavior  under  compression  was 
required  to  decrease  the  number  of  independent 
variables  in  the  solution.  The  differences  in  the 
anisotropic  crystalline  structure  of  TATB.  Strong 
hydrogen  bonds  are  present  mainly 
crystallographic  ab  plane  while  weak  Van  der 
Waals  forces  are  active  between  different  ab 
planes Fig. 3a. Such structural features condition 
crystallographic  axis  c  when  compared  to  the  a 
and  b  crystallographic  axes.    Therefore  in  this 
work  the  ratio  between  lengths  of  the  a  and  b 
crystallographic  axes  was  considered  to  be  a 
constant value in order to simplify the crystalline 
structure  calculation.  Changes  calculated  under 
above assumptions in the TATB volume with the 
applied hydrostatic pressure are shown in Fig. 5. 
The  pore  size  distribution  for  TATB  at 
different temperatures is shown in Fig. 7. The air 
pore  size  registered  in  our  experiments  using  the 
SAXS method falls within the range from 1 nm to 
20  nm.  Analysis  of  the  data  given  in  Fig.  7 
demonstrates  the  uniform  increase  of  air  pores 
within the entire range of sizes from 2 nm to 20 
nm  with  the  temperature  increase  up  to  250. 
Specific features of pore size distribution at 200 
need  to  be  additionally  confirmed.  Sizes  in  the 
range from 10 nm to 1 m will be studied with the 
help  of  the  ultra  small  angle  X-ray  scattering 
method USAXS being currently developed. 
Fig. 6. SAXS distribution at different temperatures 
of TATB. X-ray quanta energy 8.2 keV. 
Increase in the scatter intensity can be due both 
to  increased  number  of  scattering  particles  and 
also  to  their  increased  size.  According  to  the 
SAXS  theory  12  13  density  inhomogeneities 
lead  to  small-angle  scattering  of  X-radiation with 
its intensity written as 
 scattered radiation 
wavelength and  2   scattering angle. Then r  
scattering particle radius   scattering contrast 
associated  with  the  difference  in  the  density 
between an air pore and the HE matrix in our case 
 TATB Fqr  scatter form-factor specified by 
the morphology of air pores sphere ellipse etc. 
V r  particle volume N  total number of pores 
and Pr  likelihood of an air pore of the size r.  
Even  though  this  distribution  gives  only  one 
scatter-intensity  profile  backward  transformation 
is  not  unique  and  requires  model  assumptions  as 
for  the  structure.  In  this  work  air  pores  are 
simulated  with  the  help  of  the  form-factor  for 
spheres  and  thus  there  is  no  need  in  a  priori 
assumptions on the shape how scatter sources air 
pores  are  distributed.  The  iteration  method  of 
successive  approximations was  used  to  determine 
the distribution further fitted to correspond to the 
measured  profile  of  scattering  in  the  best  way 
provided  entropy  of  inhomogeneities  distribution 
is a maximum one 14. 
Fig. 7. Curve of pore size distribution at different 
temperatures of TATB. 
Structural  features  in  the  1m    10mm  range 
were  studied  by  means  of  X-ray  computer 
radiation  XRCT  6  7.  Figure  8  shows  a  3D 
image  of  the  TATB  sample.  This  image  was 
registered  with  the  help  of  the  monochromatic 
radiation  generated  by  VEPP-3 
Summing-up  of  180  projections  obtained 
through rotation of the test sample in the verticalaxis goniometer gave the three-dimensional image 
7.  A  lens  based  on  the  principle  of  Bragg 
diffraction  15  from  the  asymmetrically  slashed 
crystals was used to enhance spatial resolution of 
magnified image in the x-ray range with the spatial 
resolution not  worse  than  1-2  m.  Bragg  crystals 
help  to  make  particulars  at  the  media  boundaries 
more  distinct  due  to  X-ray  refraction  in  the  test 
sample.  Refraction  contrast  allows  us  to  register 
impossible in the X-ray range. 
images  of  objects  which 
gas inclusions to be close to a compressed sphere 
with  the  35compression  coefficient.  Figure  10 
shows  raster  electron  microscopy  results.  The 
EMS and OMS methods helped to determine first 
the shape and also sizes of inhomogeneities in HE 
in the range from 100 nm to 10 m. The shape of 
particles with the size below 100 nm needs further 
Fig.  8.  3D  image  of  the  TATB  sample  with  1 
Figure  9  demonstrates  the  curve  of  pore  size 
distribution in the TATB sample with 1 porosity 
this  curve  was  obtained  by  processing  of  the 
computer tomographic image 6 7. 
Fig.  9.  Curve  of  pore  size  distribution  in  the 
TATB sample with 1 porosity. 
In  order  to  gather  quantitative  data  on  the 
inhomogeneities  distribution  from  the  small  and 
supersmall angle X-ray scattering results we need 
information  on  actual  topology  of  air  inclusions 
inside  an  explosive  material.  As  is  described 
above air pores distribution is reconstructed in the 
assumption that these pores are spherical and this 
is scarcely probable due to directional pressing of 
HE  parts.  The  raster  electron  EMS  and  optical 
microscopy  OMS  revealed  the  morphology  of 
Fig. 10. EMS image. 
Figure 11 shows both the summary data given by 
different  methods  that  use  synchrotron  radiation 
and  also  the  data  from  paper  4  for  comparison. 
Good  agreement  between  results  of  different 
methods  is  obvious.  The  USAXS  method  will 
allow investigations of the area where the structure 
size ranges from 20 nm to 1 m. 
Fig. 11. Curve of pore size distribution in TATB. 
The  structure  of  a  heterogeneous  explosive 
material  was  subjected  to  nondestructive  testing 
and results of this investigation are presented. Data 
on  the  HE  molecular  structure  ranging  from 
characteristic  sizes  of  about  10-10  m  up  to  10-2  m 
macrostructure  are  obtained. 
provided  quantitative  characteristics 
structure  morphology  of  the  test  heterogeneous 
TATB  including  the  case  with  different  initial 
pressures and temperatures. Data on HE structure 
together with the data on HE sensitivity will help 
to  determine  effect  of  inhomogeneities  and  their 
amount on the initiation process and to determine 
mechanisms  of  heat  localization  under  external 
stimuli  on HE.  The  obtained  data  are  intended  to 
construct  mathematical  models  for decomposition 
kinetics of condensed heterogeneous explosives. 
Detonation Initiated Chemical Reactions in Structural Energetic Materials 
Kibong Kim1 William Wilson2 Juan Quintana2 Justin Roybal2 Jim Rocco3 Craig Watry3 Mary Brown3 Tony 
Zahrah4 Nick Glumac5 Mike Clemenson5 
1  Advanced Energetics Research Inc 
2  Defense Threat Reduction Agency 
Ft Belvoir VA 22060 
3  Applied Research Associates LLC 
Albuquerque NM 87110 
5  University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 
Abstract.  Blast performance of two structural energetic material SEM cases around cylindrical 
high  explosive  charges  in  the  open  and  inside  structures  is  presented.    Details  of  the  whole 
reaction process have not been fully understood yet but experimental observations and attempts of 
qualitative  numerical  simulations  indicate  that  depending  on  the  types  of  SEM  cases  reactions 
take place in two distinct forms fine-particle reaction FPR and impact-induced reaction IIR.  
The major distinction comes from the sizes of fragments coming from the SEM cases.  Numerical 
simulations helped identify the mechanisms and limitations of both types of reactions.  
Structural  energetics  materials  SEMs  a 
half-century  old  concept  Ref.  1  have  seen  major 
interest recently.  SEMs advantage when used as a 
warhead  case surrounding  a  high  explosive  HE  is 
additional  energy  through  chemical  reaction of  their 
Depending on the time scale of the reaction relative 
to  that  of  blast  wave  formation  from  the  high 
explosive  charge  this  additional  energy  can  be 
manifested in the forms of blast andor heat.   
from  SEMs  can  be 
particularly useful in the defeat of hard targets such 
as buildings bunkers and underground structures.  It 
minimizes the role of fragments for the targets where 
fragments are not effective and also reduces collateral 
effects by unintentional fragments.  Improvements of 
blast  strength  both  in  overpressure  and  in  impulse 
by several hundred percent have been observed when 
SEMs are used in small-scale weapon configurations. 
Stronger and more energetic SEMs are now 
being  manufactured  and  studied  in  more  detail.  
SEMs  are  designed  and  manufactured  in  many 
different ways.  One way to manufacture SEMs is to 
compact  fuel  particles  in  a  mold  although  in  this 
case  structural  strength  may  not  be high  especially 
when  the  particles  are  not  compacted  to  the  full 
theoretical maximum density TMD.  Many different 
types of fuel andor inert particles can be compacted 
with  or  without  porosity. 
  Other  methods  of 
manufacture  may  include  cold-sprayed  SEMs  and 
The  details  of  the  full  reaction  process  of 
most  of  these  SEMs  are  not  well  understood.  
However  it  can  be  grouped  in  the  following  three 
general  stages  1  heating  of  fuel  elements  before 
and  after  fragmentation  2  fragmentation  and 
dispersal and mixing with the ambient air and finally 
3 their ignition and combustion in air.   
ingredient  particles  and 
In the first stage initial deformation of SEM 
from  the  HE  shock  heats  and  fragments  the  SEM.  
There  are  multiple  possible  heating  mechanisms  of 
stretching  of  the  case  meso-scale  deformations 
thermitic  reactions  among  deforming  ingredients  if 
there  are  such  ingredients.    After  fragmentation 
anaerobic  heating  with  detonation  products  and 
aerobic heating with the surrounding shocked air will 
further heat the fragmented particles.  Some of these 
processes  such  as  macroscopic  deformations  and 
interphase  heating  can  be 
estimated  through  numerical  simulations.    Some 
others are poorly understood.   
of manufacturing techniques and then they are tested 
under different test conditions see for example Ref. 
4-9.    Some  limited  theoretical  modeling  Ref.  10 
and  numerical  simulations  Ref.  11-14  have  been 
attempted.  Interesting results are obtained from these 
studies but they have explored only a small number 
of  SEMs.    At  present  there  is  no  systematic  and 
comprehensive  understanding  to  predict  what  types 
of SEM materials perform better than others in given 
Fine-Particle Reaction FPR and Impact-Induced 
Some  observations  have  been  made  on 
reaction behaviors of some SEMs.  Among them is a 
differentiation between reactions of fine particles and 
large fragments.  For lack of other names they will 
be  called  fine-particle  reaction  FPR  for  fine 
particles and impact-induced reaction IIR for large 
fragments.    Fine  particles  here  means  less  than 
several hundred microns particularly in the range of 
tens of microns.  Large fragments here means those 
of  the  order  of  millimeters  and  larger.    The  term 
shock-induced reaction SIR has been used before 
by the authors in place of FPR but SIR is replaced in 
this paper by FPR to represent a broader scope of the 
When  an  SEM-cased  HE  detonates  in  a 
structure  the  SEM  case  expands. 
expansion  the  case  goes  through  heating  of  the 
ingredients  and  fragmentation  into  small  and  large 
particles.    When  the  cloud  of  particles  expands 
radially and mixes with the ambient air the particle 
number  density  is  reduced.    The  detonation  product 
gasses  containing  water  vapor  and  carbon  dioxide 
can  infiltrate  from  inside  into  the  particle  bed  heat 
them  and  may  react  with  the  fine  particles.    At  the 
same time the outer layer of the particle bed comes 
in contact with the hot shocked air is heated and may 
react with the air.  Both of these immediate reactions 
of  fine  particles  near  the  original  HESEM  charge 
location  have  been  called  SIR  and  now  are  called 
FPR of the 1st kind.    
Another form of FPR FPR of the 2nd kind 
may  take  place  when  the  particles  are  not  heated 
enough  through  the  above  heating  processes.    Nonignition can happen to particles with higher ignition 
temperatures or if the particles are somewhat larger.  
These  particles  even  larger  ones  are  not  large 
enough  to  withstand drag  forces very  long  and  they 
slow  down  significantly  before  reaching  structure 
walls.   When a  preceding  blast  wave hits  the walls 
the  reflected  waves  with  higher  gas  temperatures 
engulf nearby fine particles and can then ignite them.  
The subsequent reaction is called FPR of the 2nd kind. 
The  second  stage  which 
fragmentation process is also complex.  Some SEMs 
may  generate  fragments  of  their  original  ingredient 
sizes and other larger fragments are formed.  Their 
sizes  may  depend  on  their  deformation  processes 
andor  their  manufacturing  processes.    Often  size 
mechanical  and  combustion  material  properties  of 
these  larger  particles  are  not  predictable.    Particle 
collection  and  characterization  of  dense 
fragments a few to a few tens of microns is a new 
art and there are few data sets available currently.   
Larger  fragments  fly  out  ahead  of  smaller 
particles.    If  they  are  large  enough  they  may  reach 
nearby  walls  with  high  velocity  while  smaller 
particles are slowed down by the air drag and hit the 
walls with less impact.  Fine particles of the order of 
tens  of  microns  may  never  reach 
instabilities  also  may  play  a 
significant  role  during  the  process  and  some  jetting 
may  be  observed  during  the  process  See  for 
example  Ref.  2  3.    Hydrodynamic  dispersion 
processes may be numerically simulated except that 
the extremely high mass density multiphase turbulent 
flow-fields complicate the picture. 
In  the  final  stage  larger  fragments  and 
smaller  fragments  react  differently  and  will  be 
discussed in detail in the next section.  Fine particles 
may  get  ignited  and  react  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
detonating HE charge or they may fly out unignited 
until a blast wave is reflected from a wall to engulf 
them into a higher temperature surrounding.  Larger 
fragments  may  get  ignited  near  walls  where  they 
impact -- they may be broken into small pieces and 
get  mixed  and  ignited  with  the  nearby  air.    These 
reactions are the topic of this paper.   
Work  on  a  detailed  understanding  of  how 
SEMs  behave  has  just  recently  begun.    SEMs  with 
various ingredients are being processed with a range 
Figure 1 depicts a potential configuration of 
the two types of FPR generated by a hydrodynamic 
code SHAMRC Ref. 15.  In the figure fine SEM 
case  fragments  light  region  fly  out  ahead  of 
detonation product gases dark region.  An incident 
shock  left  side  and  several  reflected  shocks  from 
the  floor  right  side  wall  and  the  ceiling  are  shown 
dotted  lines.    The  diamond  symbol  on  the  left 
represents  fine  particles  moving  out.    If  they  are 
ignited these particles are going through FPR of the 
1st  kind.    If  they  are  not  ignited  the  fine  particles 
represented  by  a  triangle  symbol  on  the  right  may 
undergo  FPR  of  the  2nd  kind  if  they  are  ignited 
behind a reflected shock. 
Fig. 1.   A configuration of the two potential types of 
fine particle reaction FPR. 
the  other  hand  some 
fragments  will  fly  out  and  hit  steel  or  concrete 
structure  walls  with  enough  impact  speed  heat 
themselves  through  a  transfer  of  kinetic  energy  into 
internal energy break into smaller particles rebound 
and  mix  and  then  may  react  with  the  air  near  the 
walls.    This  reaction  is  called  IIR  of  the  1st  kind.  
Another type of reaction IIR of the 2nd kind occurs 
when  a  large  and  heavy  fragment  goes  through  the 
thin skin of a target partially breaks up hits a solid 
wall further down and then goes through deformation 
break-up mixes with the air ignites and burns.   
Figure  2  depicts  IIR  of 
Fragments are large large dots shown on the left and 
at  the  top  and  therefore  fly  out  ahead  of  the  shock 
front  dotted  lines.    Many  small  dots  behind  the 
shock front represent smaller fragments. Similar large 
fragments  hitting  the  right  wall  and  the  floor  are 
broken into smaller pieces and may get ignited if the 
conditions are right.  This is IIR of the 1st kind.  The 
fragments  were  intentionally  sampled  in  a  very  thin 
volume  of  space  into  the  depth  of  this  paper  to 
show  only  a  handful  of  large  fragments.    Their 
masses are 3-4 orders of magnitude larger than those 
of smaller particles. 
Fig.  2.    A  configuration  of  potential  IIR  of  the  1st 
Often  the  total  energy  released  by  a  given 
SEM  depends  on  both  types  of  reactions  together 
FPR  and  IIR.    However  it  has  been  shown  that 
certain  types  of  SEM  reacts  only  via  IIR  and  other 
types react exclusively through FPR.   
Some fuel particles of an SEM may not react 
in either mode FPR or IIR.  In the case of IIR some 
of  the  large  fuel  particles  with  perhaps  large 
mechanical strengths may not see inelastic walls nor 
strike  the  walls  with  sufficient  speed  to  break  into 
smaller particles.  Even when they strike and break 
they  may  not  bounce  strongly  enough 
sufficiently  mixed  with  the  air  around  them  to 
undergo full reaction.    
In the case of FPR small particles may be so 
closely  packed  that  they  may  not  see  enough  hot 
gasses and do not have a chance to get heated enough 
before the gas heating cools down.  Even when they 
reach  high  temperatures  there  may  not  be  enough 
oxidizing  gases  for  their  full  reaction.    Oxygen 
availability for the fuel particles and their ignitability 
and reaction rate are important issues for either type 
The  desired  performance  of  SEMs  is  to 
maximize either or both types of these reactions FPR 
and  IIR  a  in  sufficiently  short  times  to  maximize 
the  strength  of  the  blast  generated  by  the  HESEM 
charge or b in some applications to maximize the 
temperature field andor the pressure field in a given 
space.  This paper focusses more on the blast aspects 
An example of IIR SEM 
In  this  paper  two  basic  types  of  reactions 
FPR of the 1st kind and IIR of the 1st kind will be 
configurations.    FPR  of  the  2nd  kind  has  been 
demonstrated  in  numerical  simulations  but  there  is 
no clear actual demonstration of it yet.  It will not be 
discussed  further.    IIR  of  the  2nd  kind  under  a 
different name has been reported elsewhere and will 
also not be discussed here. 
Figure 3.  DTRA open air test set-up.   
Figure  4  shows  four  pressure  traces  with 
corresponding  impulse  curves.    The  four  curves 
represent  a  conventional  steel  case  solid  line  and 
three  dashed  lines  represent  a  layered  5050  massbased  SEM-1  insidesteel  outside  case  a  layered 
The  two  selected  SEMs  to  be  discussed  in 
this  paper  are  called  SEM-1  and  SEM-2.      SEM-1 
test  configurations  with 
corresponding steel case tests used as a baseline.  The 
first test series was conducted in the open see Figure 
3 for a DTRA test set-up.  Eight sting-type dynamic 
pressure  gauges  were  placed  at  various  distances 
from  the  charge  in  two  different  radial  directions.  
The  cylindrical  test  charge  is  nominally  8  lbs  HE 
with 12 lbs of SEM case with top and bottom cover 
plates  LD    2.    The  tests  measured  among  other 
things fuel fragment sizes Celotex wall as shown in 
the figure and transient pressure at various distances 
from  the  charge.    The  HE  used  in  this  figure  is  a 
designated HE-1 here. 
2575  SEM-1  insidesteel  outside  case  and  a  full 
SEM-1  case.    The  data  were  corrected  to  standard 
atmosphere of 14.69 psi and 288 K 59 F.  All three 
curves for SEM-1 are very close to each other within 
experimental  variations  and  with  that  of  the  steel 
case  where  no  reaction  is  expected  from  the  case.  
This means that in the open there is no contribution 
to the blast field from the reaction of SEM-1 in any 
configuration  layered  or  full.    Large  fragments 
collected  also  indicate  that  significant  reaction  of 
these particles was not possible. 
Figure 4.  Pressure fields by SEM-1 and steel cases in 
However when this SEM-1 was tested in a 
partially  confined  two-room  chamber  a  different 
behavior  was  observed.    The  test  setup  was  mainly 
concerned  with  measuring  the  air  blast  pressures  in 
the source room where the charge went off and the 
adjacent  room.    Pressure  and  other  gauges  were 
placed in the walls and the ceilings of both rooms.   
The  test  charge  is  similar  to  one  discussed 
above  nominally  8  lbs  HE  with  a  12-lb  case  with 
end  caps.    The  HE  used  in  this  figure  is  similar  to 
HE-1  and  is  denoted  as  HE-2  here.    The  SEMHE 
charge was placed three feet from two nearby walls 
and three feet from the floor at a blind corner of the 
source room.  Data were collected for each pressure 
calculated.    As  was  the  case  with  the  unconfined 
experiment  the  data  were  corrected  to  standard 
atmosphere of 14.69 psi and 288 K 59 F.  Based on 
repeated  tests  the  maximum  standard  deviation  for 
the  pressure  records  was  shown  to  be  very  small  a 
few percent in impulse. 
Figure  5a  shows  pressure  and  impulse 
records  of  steel  vs  SEM-1  cases  measured near  the 
opposite corner of the source room.  It is seen that the 
initial blast waves for both materials reach the gauge 
at  about  the  same  time  and  with  similar  strength.  
Corresponding  numerical  simulations  confirm  that 
this  initial  peak  pressure  is  coming  from  the  direct 
line of sight blast from the charge.  Reflections from 
the  walls  the  floor  or  the  ceiling  have  not  been 
combined into the initial blast wave yet.  This means 
that effects of any possible IIR have not reached the 
gauge  yet  and  that  there  has  not  been  much  FPR 
However the second pressure peak coming 
from  a  reflection  off  the  structure  center  floor  is 
faster  and  stronger  than  those  of  the  steel  case 
indicating  a  significant  reaction  enhancement  after 
the  reflection.    Subsequent  pressure  peaks  further 
enhance this observation.  It is difficult to determine 
with these test data precisely how much reaction has 
taken place when and where.  Post-test investigation 
of the test site reveals almost no large case fragments 
indicating their break-up into fine particles not as is 
the  situation  with  steel  cases.    Corresponding  posttest  numerical  simulations  not  shown  here  have 
demonstrated  that  an  impact  induced  reaction  IIR 
can explain this observation qualitatively.   
the  diamond.    The  circle  represents  a  full  SEM-1 
case and the triangle represents half SEM-1 and half 
steel  case.    Both  geometries  insideoutside  and 
outsideinside  of  halfhalf  steelSEM-1  were  tried 
and  the  resulting  data  show  there  is  almost  no 
difference in the outcome.  
SEM-1 was also tested with HE-3 a higher 
brisance explosive than HE-2 Fig. 6.  It is expected 
that  SEM-1  fragments  would  fly  faster  in  this  case 
than  in  Figure  5  and  thus  strike  the  walls  with 
stronger  forces.    The  strength  of  IIR  is  expected  to 
depend on how well the fragments disintegrate upon 
impact  and  how  much  the  broken  particles  rebound 
and mix with the surrounding air.  The severe plastic 
deformation  breakup  process  is  assumed  to  provide 
stronger  heating  of  particles  so  that  the  broken 
particles  more  readily  ignite  and  burn.      Therefore 
the extent of IIR with HE-3 is expected to be stronger 
than that with HE-2.  Figure 6 shows that the pressure 
peaks  after  the  first  peak  are  indeed  much  stronger 
and arrive at the gauge location faster than in Figure 
Figure 6. Pressure and impulse curves for SEM-1 and 
steel cases with HE-3.   
An example of FPR SEM 
Both  SEM-1  and  SEM-2  were  tested  in  a 
fully  confined  cubical  structure  at  University  of 
Illinois  Urbana-  Champaign  UIUC.    Figure  7 
shows  the  4ft  x  4ft  x  4ft  steel  test  chamber.    Test 
charges are made of about a 32g SEM-1 case or a 25g 
SEM-2 case surrounding 10g of HE-4 another high 
brisance HE in a right cylinder configuration.  It is 
placed  vertically  in  the  middle  of  the  chamber  and 
fired.    Among  the  instrumentation  of  a  high  speed 
framing  camera  a  polyethylene  fragment  capture 
sheet and a spatially varying spectrometer are three 
different types of pressure gauges a sting blast gauge 
wall-mounted quasi-static pressure transducers and a 
couple of disc-mount transient pressure transducers.   
Figure  5a.  Pressure  and  impulse  curves  for  SEM-1 
and steel cases with HE-2.  Figure 5b. Average peak 
pressures and impulses in the adjacent room.     
Figure  5b  shows  the  room-averaged  of  all 
gauges peak pressures and impulses of SEM-1 in the 
adjacent  room  compared  to  the  baseline  steel  case 
Table  1.    First  peak  pressure  arrival  times  and  strengths  at  two  dish  type  gauge  locations  average  quasistatic 
pressure in the chamber and estimated energy release by SEM-1 and SEM-2. 
The  estimated  energy  combustion  energy 
release of SEM-2 by FPR with or without additional 
IIR is 2209 calg.  This is more than twice as much 
energy density as from a comparable TNT detonation.  
total  energy  released 
detonation  and  afterburn  by  some  enhanced  blast 
afterburning of fuel particles after the detonation.   
This has strong implications in the design of 
blast warheads.  If only half of this energy is released 
during the propagation time of the blast from the HE 
detonation the blast energy is half of the total energy 
released  it  means  that  1  lb  of  SEM-2  would 
generate  nearly  as  strong  a  blast  as  0.5  lb  of  a 
powerful EBX would.   
Consider  a  warhead  made  of  100  lbs  of  an 
explosive  and  300  lbs  of  a  steel  case.    When  the 
warhead detonates in the open according to the Fano 
equation or the modified Fano equation Ref. 16 its 
equivalent explosive weight EEW for blast is about 
50 lbs as the fragments take away about 50 of the 
HE energy in the form of kinetic energy.  If the case 
is made of SEM-2 the warhead would thus have 50 
lbs Fano EEW  150 lbs SEM energy 3000.5  
200 lbs of EEW.  Thus the SEM-2 warhead EEW  
200 lbs would have 4 times more EEW than the steel 
Roughly  stated  the  EEW  of  an  SEM-2 
warhead  with  its  casing-mass-to-HE-mass  MC 
ratio is essentially about MC1 times as that of the 
equivalent  steel  case  warhead.      If  a  penetrating 
weapon has a larger MC the benefit is larger.  Even 
for a weapon of MC1 the blast effect is doubled.  
If  the  blast  flow  time  is  longer  the  energy  released 
within that time is larger and therefore the EEW can 
be even larger than the above estimate.    
The  2209  calg  mentioned  above  is  very 
impressive  but  when  considered  with  the  total 
available combustion energy in SEM-2 it is clear that 
the reaction was still not fully complete.  This means 
that although SEM-2 has performed very well more 
can  be  gained  if  we  can  improve  the  overall 
efficiency  of  these  SEMs.    It  is  the  hope  that  by 
understanding what is going on in the SEMs during 
 Figure 7.  UIUC closed test chamber.  
                                 
Repeatability of the tests was good within 10 in 
peak pressures.    The  gauges  placed on dish-shaped 
mounts  facing  the  HESEM  charge  sideways  are  of 
particular  interest.    If  there  was  any  fine  particle 
reaction FPR that is if there are fine fuel particles 
generated at the time of the HE detonation and they 
get ignited and burn in a fast enough time the blast 
from thedetonation charge will be enhanced.  These 
gauges  would  pick  up  the  enhanced  pressures 
including  the  first  pressure  peak  before  any  IIR  is 
generated at the walls farther away from the charge.   
One special feature of the UIUC test setup is 
that  it  is  fully  confined.    This  fact  using  measured 
quasistatic pressures second to the last column data 
allows  the  estimate  of  the  total  energy  released 
during the test event.  Quasi-static pressure histories 
not shown here would also indicate the duration of 
that reaction.  The last column in the table shows the 
estimated energy release per mass of SEM. 
The estimated energy release of SEM-1 by 
IIR only is 625 calg far below its full combustion 
energy.    This  means  that  although  a  reaction  takes 
place  through IIR for  various  reasons  mentioned  in 
the above FPR and IIR section only a small portion 
of the SEM-1 goes through a reaction process.   
the entire combustion process we can improve their 
ingredients and manufacturing processes sufficiently 
to achieve these higher efficiencies.   
Limitations of FPR and IIR 
The desired fragments sizes for fuel particle 
reaction in both FPR and IIR are estimated as follows.  
Initial  blast  events  for  10-20  lbs  warheads  occur 
within  20  milliseconds  or  less  as  evidenced  by 
Figures 5a and 6 above.  For much larger warheads 
initial blast events occur in 100 ms or so.  For the fuel 
particles to contribute in the initial phase of the blasts 
they have to react and deliver this energy in less than 
 Figure  8  Ref.  17  shows  burn  times  of 
aluminum  particles  in  air  as  an  example  of  fuel 
particles.    The  data  in  this  plot  were  obtained  with 
oxidizing gases not just air.  Assuming that the data 
are  applicable  to  the  burning  of  Al  particles  in 
explosive  products  and  shocked  air  this  means  that 
their  sizes  should  be  about  two  hundred  microns  at 
the most even with the largest warheads so that they 
can finish reacting within that time frame.  An SEM 
with larger Al particles than about 100 microns may 
take too long a time  30 ms to provide significant 
support to the blast field.  An example given in Fig. 4 
where there are no wall reflections taken by a gauge 
very close to the charge shows that the reaction time 
has to be within a couple of milliseconds. 
Figure 8.  Aluminum particle combustion times in air 
There are technical challenges in obtaining a 
sufficiently  strong  IIR.    In  the  open  as  seen  above 
IIR doesnt happen much if at all.  Fragments need 
to have high enough velocities to strike walls break 
into  fine  enough  particles  bounce  back  sufficiently 
from the walls get ignited and burn in a short enough 
time  to  contribute  to  the  blast  wave.    IIR  may  not 
happen  if  the  walls  are  not  stronghard  enough  to 
break  large  fragments  into  fine  particles.    The 
mechanism  of  the  secondary  fragmentation  upon 
walltarget  impact  needs  to  be  known  if  we  are  to 
understand the entire process. 
The temperature of rebounding fine particles 
should be high enough to get ignited when they come 
into  contact  with  the  atmospheric  oxygen.    The 
rebound velocity of the fine particles should be high 
so  that  the  fine  particles  would  not  be  too  crowded 
around the wall.  Even if they are ignited if they are 
too crowded their mass reaction would be very slow 
or  their  reaction  may  even  get  quenched  when  they 
use  up  all  the  local  oxygen.    Flow  turbulence  may 
help alleviate this problem. 
For  a  strong  IIR  fragments  should  not  be 
slowed down too much before hitting walls.  Larger 
fragments would be better in this regard.  These high 
velocity  large  fragments  may  be  able  to  undergo 
more  extensive  breakup  into  fine  particles.    High 
stress  and  large  strain  during  the  breakup  of  these 
high  velocity  fragments  may  help  increase  the 
temperature  of  the  broken  particles  by  absorbing 
more plastic deformation energy during the breakup.  
lower  MC  warhead  would  generate  higher 
fragment velocities and may increase the strength of 
IIR reaction as evidenced by Zhang Ref. 6.  
FPR  at  least  the  1st  kind  does  not  depend 
on  target  conditions  as  much  as  IIR  does  and  is  a 
more  reliable  mode  of  operation  for  SEM  weapons.  
However  an  FPR  case  still  has  some  of  its  own 
challenges as well.  As mentioned above it needs to 
generate  fine  particles  through  an  HE  detonation 
adjacent  to  the  SEM  material.    However  these  fine 
particles tend to slow down quickly and soon follow 
the  motion  of  the  gas  around  them. 
deceleration  is  fast  particle  density  could  be  much 
higher  than  the  gas  density  around  it  by  the  time 
surrounding gas.  If so the particles would use up all 
the oxygen in the gas and would stop burning. Once 
again flow turbulence downstream may alleviate this 
problem.  Addition of FPR of the 2nd kind may help 
Figure  1  showed  a  SHAMRC  numerical 
simulation of an expansion of a fine powder ring a 
mean  diameter  of  a  few  tens  of  microns  or  less 
coming  from  a  hypothetical  SEM.    The  SEM  case 
mass is about 1.5 times that of the HE-1.  A snapshot 
of density was taken at 1 ms when the powder ring 
on  the  left  side  reaches  about  20-25  times  the 
diameter  of  the  original  SEM  case.    The  density  of 
the  fuel  particle  ring  is  of  the  order  of  1  of  the 
original  SEM  density  at  this  time  but  it  still  is  an 
order  of  magnitude  higher  than  the  surrounding  air 
density.  This means there is not enough air around 
the particles for a full particle reaction.  If the SEM 
mass is much larger than the HE mass the situation 
gets  worse.    Velocity  plots  of  gas  and  particles 
indicate  that  particles  are  already  moving  almost 
together with the surrounding gasses by this time. 
The right side of Figure 1 showed turbulent 
mixing  with  gasses  at  the  bottom  and  at  the  right 
when  the  particle  ring  and  the  blast  wave  from  the 
detonation  are  reflected  from  the  walls.    As  stated 
before the turbulence and subsequent reaction by the 
heated  gas  behind  the  reflected  blast  wave  FPR  of 
the  2nd  kind  may  alleviate  the  initial  slow  reaction 
problem.    Thus  shown  the  strength  of  FPR  is  also 
affected by target configurations.   
It  has  been  shown  that  newly  developed 
SEMs  generate  strong  blasts  in  confined  spaces.  
Weapons  built  with  these  SEMs  would  be  effective 
targets  such  as  bunkers  buildings  and 
underground  structures.    Weapon  prototypes  are 
being built and tested currently. 
They  react  in  two  distinct  modes  fineparticle  reaction  FPR  by  fine  fuel  particles  and 
impact-induced  reaction  IIR  by  large  fragments.  
Both  types  of  reactions  have  their  own  challenges 
and  limitations.    Some  preliminary  observations  are 
important.    2  Blast  performance  depends  strongly 
Availability  and  accessibility  of  oxygen  is  a  critical 
factor in SEM performance.   
target  construction  and  configuration. 
  1  Fragment  size  control 
2.  Frost D.L. and others Explosive Formation of 
Coherent Particle Jets 22nd Military Aspects of 
Blast Systems Bourges France 2012. 
3.  Longbottom A. W. Milne AS. AM. Kirkpatrick 
D. J. and Henderson J. Explosively Dispersed 
Particulates  22nd  Military  Aspects  of  Blast 
Systems Bourges France 2012. 
4.  Eakins D. and Thadhani N. N. Shock-induced 
reaction in a Flake Nickel  spherical Aluminum 
Powder  Mixture  J.  of  Applied  physics  100 
5.  Zhang.  F.  Donahue  L.  and  Wilson  W.  The 
Effects  of  Charge  Reactive-Structural-Metal 
Cases  on  Air  Blast  14th 
Detonation Symposium Idaho 2010. 
6.  Ripley  R.C.  Donahue  L.  Frost  D.L.  and 
Zhang  F.  Enhanced  loading  due  to  reflected 
heterogeneous  blast  Proc.  21th  International 
Symposium  on  Military  Aspects  of  Blast  and 
Shock Oct. 3  Oct. 8 2010 Jerusalem Israel. 
7.  Frost D.L. Cairns M. Goroshin S. Leadbetter 
J.  Ripley  R.  and  Zhang  F.  Reflected 
heterogeneous  blast  Proc.  20th  International 
Symposium  on  Military  Aspects  of  Blast  and 
Shock Aug. 31  Sept. 5 2008 Oslo Norway. 
8.  Tony Zahrah private communications 2014. 
9.  Nick Glumac private communications 2014. 
10.  Salloum  M.  and  Knio  O.  Simulation  of 
Reactive Nano-laminates using Reduced models 
III  Ingredients  for  a  General  Multidimensional 
Formulation Combustion and Flame 157 2010. 
11.  Specht P. E. Thadhani N. N. and Weihs T.P. 
Meso-Scale  Computational Study of  the ShockCompression  of  Co-Rolled  Ni-Al  Laminates 
the  16th  Topical  Conference  on  Shock 
Compression of Condensed Matter 2009. 
12.  Eakins D. E. and Thadhani N. N. Meso-Scale 
the  Configuration-dependent 
Shock-Compression Response of NiAl Powder 
Mixtures Acta Materialia 2007. 
13.  Nesterenko  V. 
presented  at  the  APS  Shock  Compression  of 
Condensed Matters the 17th Topical Conference 
on  Shock  Compression  of  Condensed  Matter 
14.  Olney  K.  L.  Benson  D.J.  and  others    The 
Fragmentation  of  Al-W  Granular  Composites 
Under  Explosive  loading  Materials  Research 
Society  Symposium  proceedings  Vol.  1521 
15.  Crepeau  J.  Hikida  S.  and  Needham  C.  E. 
Second  Order  Hydrodynamic  Automatic  Mesh 
Methodology an ARA publication 2001. 
Currently  the  understanding  of  SEM  is 
increasing.  Many different types of SEM are offered 
processes.    These  are  tested  in  many  different  test 
configurations  fully  closed  partially  closed  open 
chambers  pipes  steel  walls  concrete  walls  gas 
guns spectroscopy etc.  How the fuel ingredients are 
heated  fragmented  dispersed  mixed  with  the  air 
ignited and burned are all being studied.   
These  studies  have  just  begun.    Notably 
heating  of  fuel  particles  and  fragmentation  of  SEM 
characterization  of  the  ignition  and  combustion 
understanding  would  help  reduce  the  limitations  of 
manufacturing processes. 
their  performance  and 
further  along  with A Hot Spot Concept to Enhance Fragmentation of Structural-Reactive-Material 
Fan Zhang Antoine Bacciochini Bertrand Jodoin Matei Radulescu and Robert Ripley 
Defence RD Canada - Suffield PO Box 4000 Stn Main Medicine Hat AB Canada T1A 8K6 
University of Ottawa Mechanical Engineering 161 Louis Pasteur Ottawa ON Canada K1N 6N5 
Martec Ltd. 1888 Brunswick St. Suite 400 Halifax NS Canada B3J 3J8 
Abstract. A concept of reactive hot spots intruded in a base structural reactive material 
SRM  casing  was  investigated  to  generate  fine  primary  or  secondary  fragments  for 
efficient  energy  release  from  thick  casing  material  under  explosive  loading.  This  was 
achieved through distributing micro-scale reactive material particles into base SRM in a 
fuel-rich equivalence ratio. Reaction of these particles during SRM primary or secondary 
fragmentation  creates  heat  and  gas  products  to  form  micro-scale  hot  spots  whose 
expansion initiates local fractures leading to fine SRM fragments. Test casings 7.62 cm in 
inner diameter were made using micro-scale Al-CuO as hot spot material distributed in 
base  Al  through  cold  gas  dynamic  spray  deposition  technology  which  reached  a  yield 
stress  of  200 MPa.  Explosion  experiments  were  conducted  in  a  3 m  diameter  23 m3 
cylindrical chamber for these cased charges in a casing-to-explosive mass ratio of 1.76. 
The results demonstrated more efficient fragment combustion leading to a 50 increase 
in  blast  front  pressure  in  early  time  and  a  17  increase in  quasi-static  pressure  late  in 
times versus pure Al-cased charges thus indicating the feasibility of the concept. 
A  structural  reactive  material  SRM 
defined  to  possess  both  high  energy  and  material 
density as well as structural strength. Often a SRM 
is  metallurgically  made  of  grain-scale  reactive 
metals  metal-oxides  and  sometimes  with  inert 
metal additives such that the SRM bears both bulk 
and  meso-scale  properties.  As  an  SRM-cased 
explosive  charge  detonates  casing  fragmentation 
can  deliver  both  high  speed  fragments  and  a 
  Combustion  of  reactive  fragments 
can  effectively  contribute  to  air  blast  depending 
on  the  reaction  mechanism  of  fragment  material 
but also on sizes and concentration of fragments. 
One  of  the  key  parameters  for  a  SRM-cased 
explosive  charge  is  the  mass  ratio  of  casing  to 
explosive MC.2 For a continuum aluminum Al 
casing  free-field  blast  enhancement  was  reported 
mostly  for  thin  casings  with  small  MC  values 
which  resulted  in  fine  fragments  that  combust. 
Little augmentation to air blast has been observed 
in  free  field  for  thick  Al  casings  such  as  MC   
1.75 for which the majority of primary fragments 
were  relatively  large  and  thus  function  as  inert 
material.  Blast  enhancement  from  thick  casings 
was  observed  in  confined  environments  only 
through  fragment  impact  on  targets  whereby 
generated for combustion. Additional mechanisms 
are  therefore  desired  in  order  to  create  more 
primary and secondary fine fragments for efficient 
energy release from large MC casings. 
One  of  the  sub-fragmentation  mechanisms 
uses impedance mismatch within a SRM of microscale  multiple  ingredients.34
 In small-scale tests3 
cold iso-statically pressed rings of a 4-30 m AlTungsten  granular  composite  provided  fragment 
sizes  on  the  order  of  a  few  hundred  micrometers 
under  explosive  loading.  This  was  attributed  to 
large  velocity  gradients  developed  between  the 
impedance  materials  and  structure 
discontinuities. Using a 3.5 kg thick casing of NiAl  laminate  composite  with  50-150 m  in  layer 
thickness4 explosive loading depicted significantly 
enhanced blast front pressures in the near-field. In 
this  case  shock  dynamics  at  the  interfaces  of 
different  impedance  ingredients  resulted  in  nonuniform high local temperatures and stresses and 
late in times the dissimilar inertia led to different 
accelerations.  Sub-fragmentation  depends  on  the 
meso-scale structure of dissimilar ingredients. 
In  the  present  work  another  mechanism  is 
studied  using  micro-scale  reactive  hot  spots 
intruded  in  a  base  SRM  casing  to  initiate  local 
fractures leading to fine SRM fragments. 
Theoretical Consideration 
In  order  to  generate  more  fine  primary  or 
secondary fragments to increase the energy release 
efficiency of a thick SRM casing under explosive 
loading a concept of hot spots within a base SRM 
is  considered.  This  could  be  achieved  through 
distributing micro-scale reactive material particles 
into  base  SRM  in  a  fuel  rich  equivalence  ratio. 
During  the  casing  fragmentation  upon  charge 
detonation  or  impact  of  primary  fragments  on  a 
target reaction of these particles would create heat 
and  gas  products  to  form  micro-scale  hot  spots 
whose expansion initiates local failure or fractures 
leading  to  fine  SRM  fragments.  Due  to  the  fuel 
rich  ratio  between  SRM  and  added  hot  spot 
material  the  produced  fine  fragments  would  be 
mostly  of  the  original  SRM  that  can  rapidly 
combust with air to provide more energy output. 
Al  and  Copper  oxide  CuO  particles  were 
chosen  to be  interposed  into  base  Al  due  to  their 
reaction heat and amount of high temperature gas 
products O O2 AlO Al2O etc. Assuming that the 
reaction  of  Al-CuO  is  dominated  by  diffusion 
local  reactions  around  the  distributed  particles 
would be near stoichiometric in an atomic ratio of 
NAlNCuO    23  resulting  in  a  heat  of  reaction  of 
4.077 kJg. The equilibrium explosion temperature 
was estimated to be 4640 K at the constant volume 
for  a  theoretical  material  density  TMD  with  all 
phase  changes.  In  a  previous  work5
  diffusiondominated reaction was reported to be responsible 
for combustion propagation in a cold-sprayed AlCuO composite as its density approached TMD. 
Numerical  simulations  were  performed  to 
examine  the  concept  feasibility.  A  1.25 x 0.5 mm 
planar 2D slab model was used to represent the hot 
spots  and  base  material.  Hot  spots  were  modeled 
as  ellipses  50 x 100 m  in  dimension  filled  with 
the  stoichiometric  Al-CuO.  The  spacing  between 
hot  spots  was  filled  with  Al  set  for  a  target 
volume  fraction  of  0.331  to  coincide  with  an 
overall  fuel-rich  atomic  ratio  of  NAlNCuO   2.5. 
The  mesh  was  Cartesian  containing  uniform 
square  cells  0.5  m  in  size.  The  solid  materials 
Al-CuO or C4 explosive were represented using 
a Mie-Grneisen equation of state with parameters 
for  their  thermophysical  states  and  respective 
shock  Hugoniots.  The  products  of  hot  spot 
combustion were modeled using the JWL equation 
of  state  with  expansion  fitting  from  the  Cheetah 
code.  An  Eulerian  multi-material  numerical 
equilibrium  for  mixed  states.  The  hydrodynamic 
response did not include strength effects since the 
pressure exceeded the material yield strength by an 
order of magnitude. 
If  hot  spot  particles  react  immediately  upon 
the  detonation  shock  entering  the  casing  and 
impacting them expansion of the hot spots would 
be  slow  due  to  resistance  from  highly  shocked 
pressures  in  the  surrounding  base  Al.  A  reaction 
delay  for  hot  spot  particles  may  therefore  be 
preferred  to  allow  a  sufficient  decay  of  shocked 
pressures in base Al. Thus the reaction of hot spot 
particles is assumed after a reasonable delay where 
the  casing  is  expanded  near  to  its  failure  50100 s  for  typical  Al  casings  or  right  after 
primary  fragmentation  whereby 
pressure  approaches  the  ambient.  For  simplicity 
the initial condition was approximated to be static 
at  1 atm  since  calculated  pressure  values  can  be 
regarded as pressure ratios to the initial for higher 
initial pressures. After the reaction delay reaction 
was assumed to take place instantly to provide hot 
spots at a constant volume explosion state. 
Before  casing  failure  all  boundaries  of  the 
calculation domain used rigid reflection conditions 
to represent symmetry in the large casing. Figure 1 
shows the simulation results where the Al base is 
in blue color or in dark grey when printed in grey 
scale.  It  is  found  that  a  pressure  equilibrium 
between  hot  spots  and  base  SRM  is  reached 
quickly within 0.5 s at which the hot spots stop 
expanding.  For  hot  spots  filled  with  2Al3CuO 
constant volume explosion state 3.3GPa 4640K 
and products the hot spots have expanded slightly 
as the pressures equilibrate at 2.6 GPa and no subfragments form. The explosion state p T and gas 
products  generated  by  Al-CuO  explosion  is  thus 
where the Al fragments are in red color or in dark 
grey when printed in grey scale. Thus a reactive 
particle  mixture  that  generates  higher  explosion 
state and more gas products than Al-CuO would be 
in favor of the mechanism function. 
Fig. 2.  C4  explosive  hot  spots  in  Al  base  with 
As  the  constraint  of  the  fixed  boundaries 
relieves such as for a primary fragment right after 
casing  failure  rarefaction  waves  can  reflect  from 
the  free  edges  and  propagate  into  the  fragment 
under the condition of hot spot explosion. Figure 3 
illustrates  calculation  results  using  Al-CuO  hot 
spots in the Al base with its right edge free where 
the Al base is in green color or in medium grey 
when  printed  in  grey  scale.  As  the  pressure 
waves  originating  from  the  hot  spots  reach  the 
propagates  inwards  layer  by  layer  where  a  subfragmentation pattern forms due to a difference of 
materials of hot spots and base SRM. 
Fig. 1.  Al-CuO  hot  spots  in  Al  base  with  fixed 
To  explore  a  limit  a  calculation  was  made 
replacing  the  hot  spot  fill  with  a  C4  explosive 
constant  volume  explosion 
2954K  and  products.  Far  before  the  pressure 
equilibration  i.e.  7.5 GPa  at  0.5 s  in  this  case 
rapid  expansion  of  the  hot  spots  leads  to  subfragmentation  with  its  pattern  dictated  by  the  hot 
spot  shapes  and  distribution  as  shown  in  Fig. 2 
Fig. 3. Al-CuO hot spots in Al base with its right 
increased  to  550 C  and  keeping  a  constant 
deposition  e.g.  without  clogging  the  orifice  with 
aluminum particles. The powder was deposited by 
moving  the  nozzle  back  and  forth  over  the 
substrate in rotation creating a helical  movement 
where the spray beads overlapped with a step size 
of  0.4  mm  forming  a  continuous  cylindrical 
coating around the substrate as depicted in Fig. 5. 
Ignition temperature is another key parameter 
for hot spot material reaction. In a recent vacuum 
experimental  study6
  ignition  temperatures  were 
found  to  be  similar  for  arrest-reactive-milled 
nanocomposites 2Al3CuO 4AlFe2O3 8AlMoO3 
and 2.35AlBi2O3 in a range of 800950 K which 
is  around  the  Al  melting  point.  The  study  also 
indicated the likelihood of low-temperature redox 
reactions  occurring  prior  to  ignition  and  prone  to 
rapid  decomposition  upon  further  heating.  Under 
the charge detonation condition the bulk shocked 
temperature  of  the  casing  may  not  reach  the 
thermite ignition temperature. However dissimilar 
impedance  materials 
discontinuities and micro voids from any porosity in 
the SRM casing can enhance shock dissipation and 
deformation before casing failure resulting in high 
temperatures beyond  the  ignition  threshold of  the 
hot  spot  material.  After  casing fragmentation  the 
initial  fireball  engulfs  and  further  heats  moving 
fragments  promoting  their  hot  spot  initiation  in 
addition to detonation shock initiation. 
Experimental Procedures 
In  order  to  make  a  metastable  interstitial 
composite that satisfies the SRM definition a cold 
gas  dynamic  spray  deposition  technology  was 
employed using high purity aluminum and copper 
oxide  powders.  The  average  particle  sizes  were 
d50Al    27 m  and  d50CuO    4 m.  The 
mixture  was  mechanically  premixed  following  a 
required  fuel  rich  equivalence  ratio.  The  powder 
mixture was sprayed on a 6061 Al substrate tube 
7.6 cm in external diameter using the commercial 
EP-system  Centerline  Ltd  Windsor  in  which 
pressurized helium gas was heated by a 12kW gas 
heater  and  flowed  through  a  nozzle  generating  a 
supersonic  flow  with  powder  injected  right  after 
the  nozzle  throat.  Upon  impact  on  the  substrate 
particles built up a deposit by intense local plastic 
deformation  at  solid  state  without 
reaction.  This  produced  a  SRM  which  satisfied 
mechanical  strength  and  a  high  TMD  with  little 
volumetric  porosity  as  examined  using  scanning 
electronic microscopy SEM depicted in Fig. 4. 
The  cold  spray  system  was  equipped  with  a 
plastic  nozzle  allowing  the  gas  temperature  to  be 
Fig. 4.  SEM  image  of  cold-sprayed  6AlCuO 
where Al is indicated in dark grey color. 
Fig. 5. A cold-sprayed 6AlCuO thick casing. 
The casing microstructure analysis was made 
on sample cross-sections using optical microscopy 
and SEM. The proportions of CuO inside the SRM 
cylinder  was  about  18 vol  corresponding  to  an 
atomic ratio close to NAlNCuO  6 or a weight ratio 
of  6733 wt.  The  image  analysis  on  polished 
cross  section  views  revealed  a  porosity  content 
less than 0.5  consistent with the measured SRM 
density  of  3.22 gcm3.  Although  the  porosity 
content is very small collapse of the related voids 
can enhance local temperature in favor of initiating 
Al-CuO  reaction  under  explosive  loading.  The 
SRM exhibited a yield stress 190-220 MPa and an 
elastic  modulus  of  463  GPa  obtained  from  a 
flexural  stress-strain  line  in  a  strain  range  of  0 
0.35   using  four-point  bending 
Vickers  microhardness  was  measured  on  the 
cross-sections along the coating thickness with an 
average hardness of 965. 
The measured safety data for the SRM sample 
were  BAM  Fall  Hammer  Impact  50 J  BAM 
Friction 360 N and Electrostatic Discharge ESD 
2008A 10 J compared to 3 J 60 N and 0.16 J 
for  PETN  respectively.  Differential  scanning 
calorimetry  tests  5Cmin  and  50mLmin  N2 
showed no exotherms present from 40C to 600C. 
To  increase  the  fuel  richness  and  to  examine 
the influence of distribution of hot spots an Al and 
Al-CuO  bi-layered  laminate  configuration  was 
further made by successive deposition of Al-CuO 
technology.  Nitrogen  as  working  gas  at  high 
pressure  and  high  temperature  was  successfully 
achieved  to  save  the  costs.  The  casing  analysis 
depicted a typical microstructure of the bi-layered 
casing Fig. 6 where the average thickness of AlCuO  and  pure  Al 
layers  were  respectively 
600180 m  and  1175370 m.  The  proportions 
of  CuO  inside  the  Al-CuO  layers  were  about 
18 vol.. Thus the overall CuO content was about 
6 vol  corresponding  to  an  atomic  ratio  of 
NAlNCuO  43  or  an  AlCuO  weight  ratio  close  to 
Fig. 6. SEM image of cold-sprayed bi-layered AlCuO where Al is indicated in dark gray color. 
The  image  analysis  on  cross  section  views 
revealed  a  porosity  content  below  1  in  the 
overall  casing  while 
it  was  0.40.1  and 
0.90.3  for  the  Al-CuO  and  Pure  Al  layers 
respectively. The casings exhibited a flexural yield 
stress of 116.35.2 MPa and an elastic modulus of 
30.81.3 GPa. The yield stress lower than that of 
Fig. 7. A fine-machined 7.62 cm I.D. thick-walled 
casing made of cold-sprayed 6AlCuO. 
Table 1. Tested 7.62 cm I.D. Casings 
impact  velocity  on 
premixed  Al-CuO  could  partially  be  attributed  to 
the use of nitrogen working gas that resulted in a 
the  substrate.  The 
microhardness  has  been  measured  on  the  crosssections  along  the  casing  thickness  for  each 
material the average hardness was about 53.14 in 
pure Al layers and 91.47 in Al-CuO layers. 
The  produced  casings  were  machined  to  a 
final Al-CuO cylindrical casing end-capped by Al 
plates  Fig.  7.  The  Al-CuO  casing  itself  was 
7.62 cm  in  inner  diameter  I.D.  and  16.4  cm  in 
length  to  hold  1.2 kg  C4  explosive  with  a  mass 
ratio of casing to explosive MC  1.760.5. The 
geometric  data  for  four  SRM  casings  together 
with  previous  three  continuum  casings  made  of 
pure 6061-T6 Al are listed in Table 1. 
 m    SRM  cylinder  mass.   M    Total  casing  mass 
including the cylinder and two Al end caps.  C  1.2 kg 
Explosion  experiments  were  conducted  in  a 
3 m  I.D.  23  m3  cylindrical  steel  chamber.7  A 
12.3 mm thick replaceable layer of steel was clad 
on  the  internal  surface  of  the  chamber  walls  to 
prevent  damage  from  high-speed  case  fragments. 
The charge was vertically suspended in the center 
the  horizontal  cylindrical  chamber.  Four 
Endevco  piezo-resistive  pressure 
numbered by A3 B3 C3 and D3 were installed in 
a line on the chamber cylinder wall parallel to its 
axis within the same horizontal plane of the charge 
center.  The  normal 
reflection  pressure  was 
measured  at  location  C3  whereby  locations  A3 
and B3 were on its left side and location D3 on its 
right  with  an  interval  of  0.7 m  between  them. 
High-speed video photo-graphs were taken from a 
window located at the center of the right end plate 
of  the  chamber.  The  chamber  was  sealed  with  a 
local  atmospheric  air  pressure  of  92.1-94.2  kPa 
and  temperature  of  9  to  20 C.  The  residue 
fragments  and  explosion  solid  products  were 
recovered after each test. The experimental results 
were analyzed to examine the proposed concept. 
Figures  8  and  9  show  the  casing  expansion 
fragmentation  and  subsequent  fireball  expansion 
for  the  7.62  cm  diameter  C4  charge  contained  in 
the  cold-sprayed  6AlCuO  casing  obtained  from 
speed  photographs. 
Detonation was initiated from the top by an RP83 
detonator. The cylindrical casing fracture occurs at 
a failure radius Rf  2R0 R0 - initial case outside 
radius  and  the  initial  fragmentation  is  visible  in 
the first frame of Fig. 8. 
After  casing  fragmentation  fireball  expands 
faster for the 6AlCuO casings than the expansion 
for  the  pure  Al  casing  depicted  in  Fig. 9.  This 
indicates  more  efficient  after-combustion  of  the 
Al-CuO-cased charges. 
Figure 10 provides the pressure wave histories 
at  locations  A3  B3  C3  and  D3  for  the  same 
experiment  shown  in  Fig.  8.  Among  all  gauge 
locations  the  pressure  reaches  a  highest  peak 
1.07 MPa at C3 due to normal reflection at this 
location.  Within  the  first  10  ms  between  two  to 
three  wave  reverberations  in  the  chamber  the 
pressure  rise  approaches  most  of  the  final  quasistatic pressure QSP value indicating rapid aftercombustion  of  fine  casing  fragments  that  are 
further  generated  by  secondary  fragmentation 
through  wall  impact.  The  final  QSP  reaches  a 
value  of  0.42 MPa  at  all  gauge 
indicating an equilibrium explosion pressure. 
Fig. 9.  Casing  and  fireball  radial  expansion  for 
7.62 cm I.D. 6AlCuO- and Al-cased C4 charges. 
Figure 11 compares the pressure profile at C3 
with that of the baseline charge encased in pure Al. 
Comparison of the pressure profile at C3 indicates 
a  50  increase  in  primary  wave  front  pressure 
Fig. 11-top.  The  wave  front  for  both  casings 
exhibits  a  two-shock  structure  a  precursor  shock 
as  an  assembly  of  bow  shocks  from  casing 
fragments  followed  by  the  primary  blast  shock. 
This wave front structure is typical for SRM-cased 
charges  as  previously  reported.2  Both  enhanced 
precursor  shock  and  primary  blast  front  suggest 
the  combustion  of  more  fine  fragments  from  the 
Al-CuO  casing  in  the  early  time  before  the  wave 
reaches  the  chamber  wall.  This  phenomenon  is 
consistent with the faster growth of fireball for the 
Al-CuO cased charges versus the pure Al cased as 
indicated  in  Fig. 9.  The  equilibrated  QSP  see 
Fig. 11-bottom  indicates  a  17  increase  for  the 
Al-CuO cased versus the Al cased charge. 
expansion for a 7.62 cm I.D. 6AlCuO-cased C4 
charge at 53.8 123 and 192 s 14104A. 
Fig. 11. Reflected shock fronts top and pressure 
histories bottom for the pure Al-cased 09049A 
09078A and 6AlCuO-cased 14104A charge. 
Fig. 10.  Pressure  histories  on 
Chamber wall for a 7.62 cm I.D. 6AlCuO-cased 
Fig. 12. Reflected shock fronts top and pressure 
histories  bottom  for  the  premixed  6AlCuO 
cased  14104A  and  bi-layered  Al-CuO  cased 
Figure 12 compares the pressure profiles at C3 
between charges using a premixed Al-CuO casing 
and  a  bi-layered  Al-CuO  casing.  Both  show  an 
enhanced  two-shock  wave  front  structure  and  a 
The measured blast peak overpressures P and 
QSP  for  all  tested  charges  are  summarized  in 
Table 2 where QSP represents the increase with 
respect  to  the  average  QSP  from  three  Al  cased 
charges. The burned Al mass of a casing given in 
the  last  column  of  Table 2  was  estimated  from 
equilibrium constant volume explosion calculation 
including Al fragment combustion in air using the 
  with  the  equation  of  state  of 
exponential-6  potential  and  for  inert  CuO.  Thus 
the  experimental  QSP  values  for  Al-CuO-cased 
charges  correspond  to  an  in-air  burned  Al  mass 
that occupies 28-30 wt of the casing. Noting that 
for the pure Al continuum casing the burned mass 
of encased Al is 22 wt an increase in burned Al 
mass  is  evident.  When  CuO  is  reactive  with  Al 
more  Al  mass  would  be  burned  than  the  above 
estimated  since  the  thermite  reaction  has  less 
contribution to QSP. 
Table 2. Blast Pressures 
 Normal reflection at gauge C3.  Average over all gauges. 
 With respect to 363 kPa average QSP from three Al-cased 
charges.  Corresponding to average QSP of 363 kPa. 
Effect on Fragments 
Al-CuO  casing  respectively.  Some  of  the  larger 
the  range  of  6.3-19 mm  were 
generated from the two Al end caps. 
A molten appearance of some Al fragments is 
evident  for  the  size  range  of  2.5-12.5 mm  in 
Fig. 13.  For  1-2 mm  fragments  the  SEM  images 
of  cross-sections  for  both  types  of  casings  depict 
micrometric spherical or droplet-like morphology 
as shown in Fig. 14 indicating melting metals and 
Fig. 13. Recovered fragments including fine solid 
for  a  premixed  6AlCuO  casing 
14084A upper and a bi-layered Al-CuO casing 
14155A lower. The scale displays sizes at 1 
1-2 2-4 4-6.3 6.3-9.5 9.5-12.5 and 12.5-19 mm. 
Table 3  lists  the  measured  fragment  size 
distributions for the four Al-CuO casings and the 
three  pure  Al  continuum  casings.  The  results 
clearly show a significant shift in size distribution 
towards smaller fragments for Al-CuO versus pure 
Al  casings  in  particular  for  the  size  less  than 
1 mm which includes solid products. The mass of 
1 mm  powder  amounts  81-84  wt  and  7187 wt  of 
respectively  for  the  premixed  6AlCuO  and 
layered  Al-CuO  casings.  This  indicates  a  44
recovered 
After an explosion experiment the detonation 
and  afterburning  products  were  clad  on 
chamber walls but mostly found on the floor of the 
chamber. Figure 13 provides two examples of the 
recovered  residue  fragments  and  solid  products 
from  the  charges  contained  in  the  cold-sprayed 
premixed  6AlCuO  casing  and  in  the  bi-layered 
73 wt increase when compared with the average 
of the 1 mm powder masses from the three pure 
For  the  four  Al-CuO  casings  the  mass 
fraction  is  increased  to  88-93 wt  for  less  than 
2 mm  fragments  and  94-97  wt  for  less  than 
4 mm  fragments  of  the  total  recovered  fragments 
could be attributed partially to the less mechanical 
strength of the layered casings. 
The  finest  fragments  1 mm  powders  from 
the  four  Al-CuO  casings  have  been  analyzed  to 
determine the occurrence of the thermite reaction. 
Figure  15  shows  their  X-ray  diffraction  XRD 
pattern. As expected the -Al2O3 is present in both 
premixed  and  bi-layered  casing  residues  but  this 
cannot  stand  as  a  proof  for  the  Al-CuO  reaction 
since the aluminum can react with the surrounding 
detonation  products  and  air.  However  there  are 
clear evidences of new compounds formed as the 
Al-CuO  reaction  products  in  Fig. 15  such  as 
CuAlO2  and  CuAl2O4  for  both  types  of  casings. 
The presence of CuAl2O4 is more dominant for the 
premixed  casings  than  for  the  bi-layered  casings. 
Some traces of non-reacted CuO are also identified 
but much less significant for the premixed casings 
thus indicating the extent of the thermite reaction. 
The  peaks  from  iron  oxide  Fe2O3  are  due  to  its 
cladding on the fragments during the impact onto 
the oxidized surfaces of chamber walls. 
Fig. 15.  X-ray  diffraction  pattern  of  1  mm 
Fine  primary  or  secondary  fragments  from  a 
thick structural reactive material SRM casing are 
desired  under  explosive  loading  because  their 
combustion  can  increase  the  efficiency  of  energy 
release  from  casing  material.  For  this  purpose  a 
concept  of  reactive  hot  spots  intruded  in  a  base 
9.1  45.6  61.8  68.3 
31.4  31.3  38.5  19.8  112.7 145.3 109.8 
66.5  42.4  71.1  34.7  168.4 213.8 174.6 
14084A  14104A  14119A  14155A  9049A  9078A  9167C 
9.5  38.8  69.7  30.1 
Fig. 14. SEM image of 1-2 mm fragments from the 
premixed 6AlCuO casing. 
Table 3. Fragment masses grams by size 
158.4  139.0  380.9  136.4  209.7 201.4 203.3 
122.9  77.8  142.6  87.8  207.5 219.7 192.0 
1691  1632  1627  1962  1149  1098  1143 
2090  1944  2282  2259  1932  2010  1921 
For the layered Al-CuO casings the results in 
Table  3  also  indicates  more  fragment  masses  for 
fine  fragment  sizes  of  1 mm  and  1-2 mm  as 
compared  with  the  premixed  6AlCuO  casings. 
Apart  from  the  difference  in  micro-structure  this 
SRM  casing  was  investigated.  This  was  achieved 
through  distributing  micro-scale  reactive  material 
particles into base SRM in a fuel-rich equivalence 
ratio.  Reaction  of  these  particles  during  SRM 
fragmentation  would 
generate heat and gas products to form micro-scale 
hot spots whose expansion initiates local failure or 
fractures leading to fine SRM fragments. 
As  indicated  from  numerical  modeling  both 
high explosion pressure and sufficient gas products 
are  necessary  for  the  choice  of  hot  spot  reactive 
material  in  favoring  the  function  of  the  subfragmentation  mechanism.  Secondly  an  effective 
hot  spot  expansion  within  the  base  SRM  casing 
its  sub-fragmentation  may  require  a 
reaction delay of the hot spot  material to  allow a 
sufficient decay of detonation-shocked pressure in 
the  casing.  Thirdly  for  a  moving  fragment  a 
rarefaction  wave  can  propagate  into  the  fragment 
under the condition of hot spot explosion. As the 
pressure  waves  originating  from  the  hot  spots 
rarefaction  wave  propagates  inwards  layer  by 
layer where a sub-fragmentation pattern can form 
due to a difference in expansion response between 
the  dissimilar  impedance  materials  of  hot  spots 
the  fragment  free  edge 
To  prove  the  concept  test  casings  were 
manufactured using micro-scale Al-CuO as the hot 
spot material distributed into base Al through cold 
gas  dynamic  spray  deposition  technology.  Two 
configurations of fuel-rich thick casings 7.62 cm in 
inner diameter were made 1 premixed 6AlCuO 
casing and 2 pure Al and 5Al3CuO alternatively 
layered  casing.  The  premixed  casings  reached  a 
yield  stress  of  200 MPa.  Both  casings  contained 
1.2 kg  C4  explosive  to  provide  a  casing-toratio  MC  1.76.  Explosion 
experiments  in  a  3 m  diameter  23 m3  cylindrical 
chamber  for  these  cased  charges  versus  the 
continuum  Al-cased  charges  demonstrated  more 
efficient  fragment  combustion  through  both  more 
rapid  fireball  expansion  and  a  50   increase  in 
wave front pressure in early times as well as a 17 
increase in quasi-static pressure late in times. The 
recovered  fragments 
revealed  a  44-73  wt 
increase in 1 mm fragment mass which includes 
explosion solid products when compared with that 
from  the  pure  Al  casings.  The  XRD  analysis  of 
1 mm fragments depicted significant evidences of 
the Al-CuO reaction products. These facts indicate 
the feasibility of the sub-fragmentation concept. 
Future  studies  of  shock  initiation  of  microscale reactive materials interposed in a base solid 
are necessary to understand their ignition threshold 
loading.  Detailed  numerical 
modeling  of  hot  spot  explosion  and  subfragmentation  formation  under  explosive  loading 
will be conducted to gain a better understanding of 
the  mechanism.  Finally  in  order  to  increase  the 
efficiency  of  hot  spot  sub-fragmentation  more 
advanced  hot  spot  reactive  materials  will  be 
desired  in  aspects  of  hot  spot  explosion  pressure 
The  significant  effort  and  support  of  Brain 
Eichelbaum Kiril Mudri Robin Laing Karl Baker 
and  the  technical  staff  from  the  Suffield  Field 
Operations Section in conducting the experiments 
are  gratefully  acknowledged.  This  work  was 
jointly  funded  by  Defence  RD  Canada  and  the 
Advanced  Energetics  Program 
Dr. William H. Wilson. Melt Cast ADN and Aluminum A new and Powerful Underwater Explosive.  
Henric stmark henric.oestmarkfoi.se and Andreas Helte 
Swedish Defence Research Agency FOI  
SE-164 90 Stockholm Sweden 
Abstract. A series of experiments has been conducted in order to evaluate the potential of 
melt-cast  ADNAl  as  a  high-performance  underwater  explosive.  A  method  for  melt 
casting of ADN and ADNAl in up to 20 kg scale has been developed. By adding 1 
MgO as kernel starters densities in the range of 92  99  of TMD have been reached. 
The charges were tested in an underwater test facility where the bubble and shock wave 
energies  were  measured.  The  result  is  a  total  energy  of  2.4  times  TNT  and  1.26  times 
In modern warfare the need for more powerful 
underwater  explosives  has  been  identified  for  a 
number  of  applications.  Our  existing  weapons 
systems  need  to  be  more  lethal  due  to  emerging 
harder  to  kill  threats.  More  powerful  explosives 
are  also  needed  in  order  to  reduce  the  size  of 
weapons  systems  e.g.  torpedoes.  Ammonium 
dinitramide ADN is both a high explosive and a 
powerful  oxidizer  and  is  a  potential  replacement 
for ammonium perchlorate AP in propellants and 
underwater  explosives  1-3.  Mixed  with  aluminum 
powder it has potential as a very high performing 
underwater  explosive.  In  Sweden  and  the  UK 
explosives  have  been 
identified  as  the  most  promising  candidate  with 
respect to performance.  
ADNAl  charges  can  be  melt  casted  using 
special  techniques.  To  evaluate  the  underwater 
performance a number of different compositions of 
ADNAl  containing  varying  degree  and  type  of 
aluminum  were  manufactured  and  fired  at  the 
Swedish  outdoor  underwater 
lvsnabben  and  at  the  UK  test  site  at  WesternSuper-Mare. 
Numerical  simulations  can  be  used  to  assess 
the  vulnerability  of  naval  platforms  subjected  to 
underwater  explosions  and  the  effectiveness  of 
weapon  systems  containing  high-explosives  if  a 
proper description of the HE is available. A JWL 
equation of state EOS was determined for one of 
the  tested  compositions  from  cylinder  test  data. 
Hydrocode  simulations  of 
propagation  and  bubble  dynamics  using  the  EOS 
showed excellent agreement with the experiments. 
The  results  from  the  underwater  tests  show 
that ADNAl underwater explosives outperform all 
in  bubble  energy  without 
sacrificing  shock  energies. 
indicate that by varying the particle size and mass 
fraction of aluminum the bubble energy and shock 
aluminum  content  and  size  of  the  aluminum 
particles it is possible to further increase both the 
shock  energy  and  bubble  energy.  The  main 
tailored.  By  optimizing 
remains an open question if the sensitivity can be 
reduced to an acceptable level. 
Melt Casting Technique 
ADN  can  be  melt  cast  easily  but 
technique for melt casting TNT cannot be directly 
applied1.  MgO  is  an  effective  stabilizer  for  ADN 
and it also works to nucleate crystal kernels within 
Unstabilized ADN cannot be melt cast due to  the 
excessive gas generation rate and risk of initiation. 
ADN must also contain some moisture to make it 
melt-castable and mechanically stable.  
Aluminum powder can be mixed into ADN at 
least  up  to  35  wt  content  without  problems.  In 
fact  Al  mixtures  are  easier  to  cast  than  ADN 
without  Al  with  the  correct  type  of  aluminum 
powder.  The  optimal  aluminum  powder  particle 
size  is  10  m  for  spherical  and  smooth  particles 
and  50  m  for  irregularly  shaped  powder.  ADN 
significantly  better 
mechanical properties than pure ADN. ADN with 
aluminum  produces  the  same  or  better  quality  of 
casting  compared  to  pure  ADN  i.e.  the  relative 
density  as  percentage  of  TMD  is  the  same  or 
higher with aluminized ADN. Aluminum particles 
functions  as  crystallizing  kernels  for  ADN 
producing  much  finer  crystalline  material  than 
solidifying  making  it  more  difficult  to  obtain  a 
tension-free  casting.  An 
embedded heater in the middle of the cast form as 
is  customary  when  casting  TNT  cannot  be  used. 
Instead the forms have to be heated externally and 
solidification has to take place axially. The highest 
density  of  the  cast  ADN  or  ADNAl  is  obtained 
when the material is solidified as an axial front and 
as fast as possible starting from the bottom of the 
low  coefficient  of 
conductivity  which  limits  the  size  of  the  charges 
to  be  cast  due  to  gas  evolution  from  the  melted 
substance. Charges up to 100 mm in diameter and 
300 mm length were successfully cast hence the 
maximum dimensions of a cast ADN charge are at 
By adding 1  MgO to the formulation small 
scale  ADNAl  charges  were  casted  successfully 
with  densities  in  the  range  92-99  .  It  proved 
more  difficult  to  attain  these  high  densities  for 
large  scale  charges  5-20  kg.  All  charges  tested 
produced for this  work contains around 1 MgO 
as  a  stabilizer  and  nucleation  kernel.  A  more 
extensive  description  of  the  melt  cast  technique 
can be found in a paper by Hahma4.  
Underwater performance tests 
The  experimental  set-up  used  for 
experiments  is  the  same  as  normally  used  in 
Sweden  for  underwater  performance  tests  and  is 
shown  in  Figure  1.  The  test-area  is  off  the  east 
coast of Sweden in the Baltic Sea see Figure 2. 
The  water  depth  at  the  test  area  is  approximately 
42 meters. The primary diagnostic consists of four 
tourmaline  pressure 
transducers  at  different 
distances  from  the  charge  approximately  3.90 
7.00 12.50 and 23.00 m the exact distances where 
measured before each shot.   
Pressure transducers
Fig. 1 Schematic of experimental set up for 
performance measurement of Underwater 
Fig. 2 The Swedish Underwater test facility. 
Evaluation of UW explosives performance 
characterized by two performance parameters the 
specific shockwave energy and the specific bubble 
energy.  The  pressure  pulse  in  a  shock  wave 
generated by an underwater explosive has a sharp 
followed  by  an  approximately 
exponential  decrease  characterised  by  the  peak 
pressure  Pm  and  time  constant   
The exponential decay is in general valid for one 
following  pressure  pulse 
decreases  more  slowly  and  sometimes  also 
contains  bumps.  An  approximate  formula  for  the 
shock  wave  energy  flux  density 
account  finite  amplitude  and  after-flow  effects 
expressed solely in terms of pressure is given by  
The  specific  shockwave  energy  es  is  obtained  by 
integrating the energy flux density over a spherical 
surface  of  radius  R  and  divide  the  expression  by 
the charge weight Q. 
limit  T  in  the  energy  integral  is  set  to  5  for  the 
charges  detonated  in  Sweden  and  6.7  for  the 
charges detonated in UK. 
The bubble energy is defined as the work done 
in  expanding  the  bubble  to  its  maximal  volume 
and  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  the  maximum 
bubble radius. Since the maximum bubble radius is 
not  measured  directly  we  have  instead  used  an 
approximate  method  which  makes  use  of  the 
bubble period i.e. the time between the shockwave 
and the first bubble collapse. In this work we have 
used  the  analytic  expression  in  Swisdak5  giving 
the  bubble  period  constant  kb  in  terms  of  the 
bubble  period  charge  weight  charge  depth  total 
water  depth  and  hydrostatic  pressure.  The  bubble 
energy can then be related to a reference explosive 
with  known  bubble  energy  and  bubble  period 
where  Pm  is  the  peak  overpressure  expressed  in 
MPa c0 is the acoustic sound velocity and 0 is the 
Table 1.  Summary of bubble and shockwave energies for tested UW-charges 
30.3 TNT 36.7 RDX 33 Al A100 
60 ADN 40 Al A100 meas. in UK 
60 ADN 40 Al A100 meas. in UK 
60 ADN 20 Al A100 20 Al H10 
60 ADN 20 Al A100  20 Al H2 
65 ADN 35 Al H3 meas. in UK 
55 ADN 45 Al H3 meas. in UK 
A  summary  of  the  measured  bubble  and 
shockwave energies is given in Table 2 
Cylinder tests were performed to characterize 
the  explosive  performance.  A  full-wall  copper 
cylinder length 350 mm inner diameter 60 mm 
shell  thickness  6  mm  filled  with  melt  cast 
ADNAlMgO  64351  wt  was  used.  A  plane 
wave  lens  initiated  the  charge.  The  detonation 
velocity  was  measured  by  recording  the  arrival 
time to 4 piezo-pin transducers at 20 mm spacing 
over a length of 60 mm along the cylinder axis. A 
Cordin  rotating  mirror  camera  model  116  was 
displacement  and  thereby  indirectly  the  velocity 
of  the  detonating  cylinder  see  Figure  3.  The 
selected streak speed was 4 mms. As light source 
a cylindrically shaped argon flash bomb was used.  
The  streak  image  was  scanned  in  an  optical 
flatbed  scanner  in  transmission  mode  see  Figure 
4. The scanning resolution was 1600 dpi giving a 
time resolution of 3.97 nspixel and a displacement 
resolution  of  38  mpixel.  The  edge  between  the 
expanding cylinder and air was extracted by image 
processing  and  the  radial  displacement  velocity 
was calculated with digital Savitzky-Golay filter2. 
Fig. 3. Experimental setup for cylinder expansion 
Fig.  4.  Streak  recording  of  radial  expansion  of 
The  Jones-Wilkins-Lee  JWL  equation  of 
specific  volume  E  is  internal  energy  per  initial 
multiplied  by  initial  density 
R1 R2 and  are material parameters. 
JWL-parameters for ADNAl 6535 wt at density 
1.75  gcm3  were  calculated  with  Cheetah  version 
the  BKWC-library.  The  calculated 
detonation  velocity  was  far  from  the  measured 
value of 5890 ms. The cylinder test was simulated 
displacement  and  velocity  were  sampled  by  a 
special cylinder test routine. The JWL-parameters 
were adjusted to get a good agreement between the 
measured and calculated cylinder expansion under 
the  measured  detonation 
velocity  should  be  reproduced  exactly.  The  new 
parameters are presented in Table 2 together with 
the  Cheetah  calculated  parameters.  The  measured 
and calculated radial velocities using the calibrated 
JWL-parameters are presented in reference 6.  
Shock wave propagation and bubble dynamics 
An  example  calculation  of  the  shock  wave 
propagation  and  bubble  dynamics  for  one  of  the 
test charges 8.520 kg ADNAlMgO 64351 wt 
at 21.26 m depth  were performed  with the  finite 
element  program  GRALE2D  using  the  JWLparameters  from  the  cylinder  test.  GRALE2D  
GRindsjn  Arbitrary-Lagrangian-Eulerian  2D  is 
a FOI-developed explicit finite element code with 
Lagrangian and multi-material ALE formulations.  
Table 2. JWL-parameters for ADNAl 6535 wt 
at density 1.75 gcm3. Calculated from Cheetah 2.0 
with  BKWC-library  and 
detonation velocity and cylinder streak record. 
Cheetah 2.0  Fit to exp. data 
Shock Wave Propagation 
The  detonation  event  and  subsequent  shock 
propagation in the water were performed with two 
different  programs  GRALE2D  described  above 
and  SPHEREX  which  is  a  1D  hydro-code  for 
spherical  symmetric  problems  using  Lagrangian 
elements  coupled  with  an  adaptive  mesh 
refinement  AMR  technique.  The  computational 
domain for GRALE2D was 13.75 m  4 m using 
2200640  elements  and  6  mm  cell  size  and  for 
SPHEREX 2 mm cell size with finer resolution at 
shock  front due to the  AMR. The detonation  was 
modelled as a programmed burn with a JWL EOS 
with  parameters  from  the  cylinder  test.  Both 
GRALE2D  and  SPHEREX  showed  excellent 
agreement  with  the  experimental  results.  The 
results are presented in Figure 5. 
The  2D  bubble  dynamic  calculation  was 
initialized from the 1D-calculation presented in the 
previous subsection see Figure 6. In the model the 
bottom was treated as rigid and a 5 m thick layer 
of  air  above  the  sea  surface  was  included.  The 
computational domain was extended 100 meter in 
the  radial  direction  with  a  progressively  coarser 
grid outward. A simple pressure cut-off cavitation 
model  was used and all external boundaries  were 
subjected to a non-reflecting BC.  
In Figure 7 the calculated pressure at the first 
gauge  is  shown  together  with 
pressure.  It  can  be  observed  that  the  calculated 
bubble  period  was  0.326  s  which  is  close  to  the 
measured value of 0.335 s. 
Fig 6. Calculated pressure from 1D calculation 
used for initialization of 2D calculation. 
Fig. 5. Calculated and measured shock pressure. 
dinitramide ADN Proceedings of the 12th 
Detonation Symposium pp. 775-780 SanDiego 
4. Hahma A H. Edvinsson and H. stmark The 
Properties of Ammonium Dinitramine ADN 
Part 2 Melt Casting Journal of Energetic 
Materials Vol. 28 pp. 114138 2010. 
5. Swisdak M. Explosion Effects and Properties 
Part II  Explosion Effects in Water NSWCWOL 
6. K arlsson S. stmark H. Eldster C. 
Carlsson T. Bergman H. Wallin S. and 
Pettersson A. Detonation and Sensitivity 
Properties of FOX-7 and Formulations Containing 
FOX-7 Proceedings of the 12th Detonation 
Symposium pp. 286-291 San Diego CA August 
Fig 7. Calculated and measured pressure. 
tested  ADNAl  underwater 
explosive  compositions  had  very  high  bubble 
energy  with  a  Relative  Bubble  Energy    250 
TNT.  The  specific  shockwave  energy  is  between 
94 and 160  that of TNT. It is to  some extent 
possible  to  combine  high  shockwave  energy  with 
high  bubble  energy  by  using  aluminum  of 
different  particle  sizes.  For  compositions  with  a 
high content of aluminum with very small particle 
sizes  better  melt  casting  techniques  need  to  be 
developed. The result of the UW-performance test 
shows  that  melt  cast  ADNAl  has  an  exceptional High Resolution Chemistry Based Modeling of LLM-105 Explosives 
Peter Vitello K. Thomas Lorenz D. Mark Hoffman Laurence E. Fried and P. Clark Souers  
Energetic Materials Center 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94550 USA  
Abstract.  LLM-105  26-diamino-35-dinitropyrazine-1-oxide  is  an  insensitive  high 
explosive which has performance between that of HMX and TATB. It is insensitive to 
shock spark and friction and has an impact insensitivity level approaching that of TATB. 
These properties make it a realistic high-performance insensitive high explosive material 
attractive  for  applications  that  require  moderate  performance  and  insensitivity.  Several 
LLM-105  morphologies  and  plastic-bonded  formulations  have  been  prepared  and  their 
detonation  performance  has  been  experimentally  studied.  We  present  chemistry  based 
modeling  of  these  formulations  and  experiments  using  the  thermochemical  code 
CHEETAH linked to a multi-dimensional ALE hydrodynamics model. Using CHEETAH 
we  explicitly  specify  the  explosive  material  composition  and  initial  density.  We  show 
that  CHEETAH  is  able  to  accurately  model  the  different  LLM-105  based  explosives 
formulations over a wide range of densities using the same burn rate model.   
LLM-105  26-diamino-35-dinitropyrazine-1oxide  is  a  newly  developed  insensitive  high 
explosive IHE. It has excellent thermal stability 
few  cold-performance  effects  and  performance 
between  that  of  HMX  and  TATB1.  Its  calculated 
energy  content  is  about  85  that  of  HMX  and 
15 more than that of TATB. It is insensitive to 
shock  spark  and  friction  and  has  an  impact 
insensitivity  level  approaching  that  of  TATB.  
These  combined  properties  make  it  a  realistic 
high-performance  IHE  material  attractive  for 
applications  that  require  moderate  performance 
and insensitivity.   
Several  LLM-105  morphologies  and  plasticbonded  formulations  have  been  prepared  over  a 
range  of  densities 
performance has been experimentally studied. The 
rate  of  development 
formulations has been limited by the synthesis and 
considerations.  The 
synthesis route used dimethoxy pyrazine DMP as 
a  starting  reagent.  This  route  has  been  refined  to 
increase  yields  reduce  impurities  and  reduce 
costs.  The  DMP  route  produces  high  quality 
crystals  of  modest 
40-50  um  mean  size. 
However this route also yields 5-10 ANPZ 26diamino-35-dinitropyrazine a co-product having 
lower  density  1.800  gcc  and  less  energy  than 
LLM-105. A second route was developed recently 
that  uses  significantly  less  expensive  starting 
reagents  to  produce  a  stable  intermediate  DAPO 
26-diamino-pyrazine-1-oxide.2 This intermediate 
is  a  non-explosive  that  can  be  manufactured  in 
quantity and nitrated in a single step in a separate 
controlled process. This results in a safer and less 
costly  manufacturing  path.  The  new  synthesis 
yields  a  very  pure  product  with  good  yield. 
However  the  new  route  yields  smaller  20  um 
crystals resulting in more challenging formulation 
and part fabrication issues. 
The  changing  synthesis  and  manufacturing 
paths have led to a variety of research formulations 
being  developed  at  LLNL.  Most  of 
formulations  have  been  PBXs  -  plastic  bonded 
explosives.  PBXs  are 
molding powders and then compacted under high 
loads 20-30 kpsi to shape or into a part that can 
machined  to  the  desired  shape.  The  detonation 
performance  of  the  PBX  is  heavily  dependent 
upon  the  density  and  quality  of  compaction 
defined  here  as  porosity  and  uniformity  of 
porosity. Furthermore the compaction process is 
highly  dependent  upon  the  size  and  shape  of  the 
formulations  have  attempted  to  balance  energy 
content with compaction qualities by varying the 
type  and  amount  of  binder.  Viton-A  DuPont 
Kel-F  800  historically  used 
PBX9502  and  FK-800  manufactured  by  3M  to 
closely  resemble  Kel-F  800 are  the  binders  used 
this  study.  Increased  binder  content  can 
generally help improve compaction but results in 
a part having lower density and energy content. A 
second method for achieving better compaction is 
to use a combination of coarse and fine explosive 
crystals. The fine crystals are made from a milling 
process  either  fluid  energy  milling  or  ball 
milling  and  are  combined  with 
particles in a 13 ratio. This bimodal distribution of 
particle  size  usually  results  in  a  compacted  part 
having 1-2 higher density than the mono-modal 
formulation.  Table  1  shows  the  composition 
synthesis  route  and  particle  description  used  for 
each formulation discussed in this paper. 
We present here a chemistry based modeling 
of wall and foil velocity experiments for LLM-105 
base  explosives  using  the  thermochemical  code 
CHEETAH33-4 linked to a multi-dimensional ALE 
hydrodynamics model.   
CHEETAH  is  a  multi-phase  first  principle 
based  equation  of  state  model  which  uses  as  its 
starting  point  a  gas  phase  model  based  on 
exponential-6  potential.    Condensed  phases  are 
treated  with  an  extended  Murnaghan  equation  of 
state.    The  linked  CHEETAH-ALE  model  treats 
slowly reacting chemical species using kinetic rate 
laws  with  chemical  equilibrium  assumed  for 
species  coupled  via  fast  time  scale  reactions.  
simultaneously treated.  This results in a flexible 
self-consistent  treatment  of  the  equation  of  state 
concentrations  of  condensed  and  gaseous  species 
significant  variations 
The CHEETAH model we have developed can 
treat  different  LLM-105  based 
explosives  simply  by  specifying  their  chemical 
composition  and  the  initial  explosive  density.  
Differing binder materials Viton and Kel-F and 
binder  concentrations  were  considered.  The 
differences  between  variants  of  Viton  and  Kel-F 
were  ignored  since  the  binder  concentration  was 
only a few per cent of the total explosive mass. 
Table 1 Formulation Matrix for LLM-105-based PBXs
We include separate kinetic rate equations for 
transformation  of  LLM-105  binder  and 
possible  contaminates  into  products.  Use  of  the 
same rate for each of these materials was found to 
be  adequate.  This  allows  all  components  of  the 
initial  HE  material  species  to  be  simultaneously 
burned to products species. The growth of a small 
particulate form of condensed graphite to a larger 
particulate  form  was  also  included.    The  kinetic 
reactions treated were 
C                                                  5 
In  the  above  CS  and  CB  refer  to  small  and 
large carbon graphite clusters which represent the 
effective  initial  and  final  graphite  concentrations.  
Since the gases are kept in instantaneous chemical 
equilibrium the specification of the gas species in 
the reaction is not unique. Note that the chemical 
composition  of  LLM-105  and  the  contaminant 
ANPZ are very similar.  This similarity resulted in 
our  simulations  showing  small  differences  in 
energy  release  between  pure  LLM-105  and 
samples contaminated with ANPZ. 
                . 3 
The kinetic burn rates used have the following 
 is the ratio of the species burn mass fraction.to 
its initial value. Q is the artificial viscosity.  A B 
C  1  2  and  P1  are  constants.  The  effective 
pressure  P    Q  rather  than  P  was  used  in  the 
local  pressure  power  law  terms  to  be  consistent 
with  the  use  of  this  effective  pressure  in  the 
hydrodynamic  modeling  of  the  momentum  and 
energy equations. Arrhenius kinetics were used for 
carbon cluster growth 
                  .      7 
C  are  constants.  The  rate  controlled 
species were LLM-105 ANPZ Viton Kel-F and 
CB. Two pressure power law rates as given in eq. 6 
were  used  for  the  burning  of  LLM-105  ANPZ 
Viton  and  Kel-F.  The  values  for  A  B  C  1  2 
and  P1  for  the  rates  were  respectively  0.6  1  2 
0.15 0.1 10 and 17 1.5 1 0 0.1 10. These two 
rates run in parallel with the first providing rapid 
burning  until  15  of  the  initial  mass  fraction 
remains.  The second rate gives a slower but less 
pressure  dependent  rate  to  finish  the  burn.    The 
C  for the carbon rate were 
constant values E and T
0.2 and 2000. Species concentrations that were not 
kinetic rate controlled were calculated as being in 
chemical  equilibrium  for  pressures  greater  than  a 
specified  freeze  pressure  PF  and  were  held 
approximately constant below this pressure.   
To  calibrate  the  LLM-105  based  explosive 
kinetic  rates  we  used  LLNL  copper  cylinder  and 
Disc  Acceleration  eXperiment 
Figure  1  shows  a  schematic  of 
experimental setup. In the DAX experiment a thin 
10-16 mil foil was accelerated by the detonation 
wave  as  it  reached  the  end  of  weakly  confined 
cylinder disks. The acceleration time scale to reach 
terminal  velocity  was  few  microseconds.  For  the 
LLM-105  based  explosives  considered  here  the 
estimated detonation reaction zone was 0.1 mm 
which was comparable to the foil thickness. This is 
substantially larger than the 3 mm reaction zone 
found  in LX-17.   The foil velocity  was primarily 
sensitive to detonation wave pressures close to the 
detonation  wave  front.  Copper  cylinder  wall 
microseconds.  This longer acceleration time scale 
makes the cylinder wall velocity weakly dependent  
treat  acceleration  over 
Piezoelectric timing 
Acrylic containment 
3 inch long HE disks 
Fig. 1.  DAX experimental geometry. 
upon  pressure  variations  within  the  reaction  zone 
and  sensitive  to  the  late  time  adiabatic  expansion 
regime  of  the  detonation  wave.  The  data  from 
complementary  in  being  sensitive  to  different 
regions of the detonation wave.   
To fully resolve the detonation reaction zone 
for  our  LLM-105  based  explosives  and  the  DAX 
foil  required  spatial  mesh  resolution  on  the  order 
of 1000 zonescm. Two dimensional cylindrically 
symmetric  simulations  of  the  cylinder  or  DAX 
experiments  using  a  uniform  mesh  with  this 
resolution would have required tens of millions of 
Instead  we  used  Automatic  Mesh 
Refinement  AMR  to  allow  dynamic  changes  in 
the  mesh  spacing.    We  used  four  levels  of  mesh 
refinement  from  30  to  810  zonescm.  Regions  of 
rapid  change  in  pressure  or  density  were  highly 
resolved  while  areas  with  only 
variations were coarsely meshed.  This resulted in 
a dramatic reduction in the total number of spatial 
zones  needed  a  typical  factor  of  500  while 
preserving resolution at the detonation wave front 
and in the foil.  The copper cylinder experiments 
for  wall  velocity  or  breakout  timing  were  less 
sensitive to how well the detonation wave reaction 
zone was resolved.  A 320 zonescm uniform mesh 
was  found  sufficient  for  our  copper  cylinder 
simulations.  Comparisons  between  this  uniform 
meshing  and  our  higher  resolution  AMR  mesh 
showed no significant differences.   
The eight different plastic bonded variants of 
LLM-105 shown in Table 1 were included in our 
calibration.  Several  different  synthesis  processes 
were  used  in  manufacturing  methods  for  LLM105resulting in varying amounts of contaminants 
the  most  significant  being  ANPZ. 
contamination  was  5  for  DMP  synthesis 
formulations.  Mass fractions of LLM-105 Viton 
A Kel-F and ANPZ were explicitly specified for 
each  RX-55  variant  in  our  CHEETAH  model.  
Detailed  comparisons  of  simulations  assuming 
pure  LLM-105  as  compared 
contaminated  with  ANPZ  were  extremely  similar 
in  behavior  with  differences  less  than  that  seen 
between  different  data  sets 
One inch diameter copper cylinder detonation 
experiments  were  done  at  LLNL  for  RX-55-AB 
and RX-55-BS with respective densities of 1.825 
gcc and 1.861 gcc.  DAX experiments were done 
for RX-55-AY RX-55-BI RX-55-BJ RX-55-BK 
RX-55-BP  and  RX-55-BT  with 
densities  of  1.832  gcc  1.818  gcc  1.818  gcc 
1.818  gcc  1.859  gcc  and  1.833  gcc.  The  HE 
densities  for  the  DAX  experiments  correspond  to 
the  density  of  the  last  pellet  before  the  foil.  For 
RX-55-AY  a  16  mil  aluminum  foil  was  used 
while  a  10  mil  copper  foil  was  used  for  all  the 
other DAX experiments. 
rate  calibration  primarily  used 
breakout timing data from the RX-55-AB one inch 
diameter  copper  cylinder.  The  shape  of 
breakout is sensitive to the value of the explosive 
burn  rate  which  determines  the  detonation  wave 
front  curvature.    Figure  2  shows  a  comparison 
between the simulation and experimental break out 
timing after our rate calibration. The curve labeled 
Rate  0.8 corresponds to the simulation breakout 
timing if the burn rates were reduced by a factor of 
0.8.  This  indicates  that  our  rate  was  sensitive  to 
roughly  20  variations.  Reducing 
increases  the  breakout  time  delay  at  all  radii 
moving  the  calculated  results  away  from  the 
experimental  data.  Figure  3  gives  the  simulation 
pressure  profile  slightly  before  breakout  showing 
how  slight  the  detonation  wave  curvature  is. 
Detonation  curvatures  for  all  the  LLM-105  based 
explosives considered here are much smaller than 
that  of  LX-17  92.5  TATB  7.5  Kel-F  or 
PBX9502 95 TATB 5 Kel-F.  To match the 
breakout  timing  we  were  required  to  use  a  burn 
rate  roughly  20  times  greater  than  that  for  our 
CHEETAH  LX-17  or  PBX9502  models.  This 
implies that the LLM-105 based explosives have a 
considerably  smaller  reaction  zone  than  TATB 
based explosives. As LLM-105 was the dominant 
component for each explosive considered here we 
assumed that the burn rates were the same for all 
RX-55  variants.    A  sensitivity  study  showed  that 
variations  in  the  burn  rates  of  20  did  not 
significantly  modify  our  results  for  foil  or  wall 
The DAX experiment foil velocity is sensitive 
to the detonation wave reaction zone and is very 
weakly  dependent  on  the  detonation  pressure 
behind the CJ point. This selective sensitivity was 
used  in  our  model  calibration  to  separate  early 
time vs. late time energy release effects. Figures 45 show DAX simulation pressure profiles slightly 
before  and  after  the  copper  foil  was  accelerated.   
Figure  5  shows  a  reflected  shock 
backwards  from  the  foil  and  a  rapid  drop  in 
pressure behind the foil.   
Fig. 2. Comparison between breakout timing from 
CHEETAH  simulations  and  one  inch  RX-55-AB 
copper  cylinder  data.  The  solid  curve  gives  the 
experimental  breakout  timing.  The  dashed  curve 
shows  results  from  our  calibrated  rate  model 
the  dotted  curve  represents  simulation 
breakout  timing  done  with  the  burn  rate  reduced 
by a factor of 0.8. 
Fig.  3.  Simulated  copper  cylinder  test  pressure 
image  shows  how  slight 
detonation wave curvature is for RX-55-AB. 
affect  the  detonation  velocity  or  breakout  timing 
and has little effect on the DAX foil velocity.   
After  calibration  we  were  able  to  model  the 
LLX-105  experiments  simply  by  specifying  the 
initial  mass  fractions  and  initial  density  of  each 
explosive.  Figure  6-8  compares  our  DAX 
simulation results to data for RX-55-AY RX-55BP and RX-55-BT respectively. This comparison 
considers  different  flyers  binders  and  densities. 
The RX-55-AY case used an aluminum foil and a 
Viton  binder.    The  RX-55-BP  and  RX-55-BT 
cases  used  copper  foils  which  accelerate  more 
slowly than the aluminum foils due to their higher 
density.    RX-55-BP  used  a  Viton  binder  while 
RX-55-BT  used  Kel-F  as  the  binder.    Good 
agreement  is  evident  over  a  density  range  of 
1.832-1.859 gcc and for both binders.  Early time 
aluminum  and  copper  foil  oscillations  in  the 
simulations  were  sensitive  to  the  metal  EOS  and 
strength  model  used  and  was  likely  the  main 
source of disagreement with experimental data. 
Fig.  4.  Simulation  copper  foil  DAX  pressure 
profile at 11 s slightly before the detonation wave 
Fig  6.  DAX  aluminum  foil  velocity  on  axis  for 
RX-55-AY at 1.832 gcc with a Viton binder. 
Fig. 5 Simulation copper foil DAX pressure profile 
at 12 s slightly after the detonation wave reaches 
The copper cylinder wall velocity is strongly 
dependent  upon  the  CJ  pressure  and  somewhat 
sensitive  to  the  CHEETAH  freeze  pressure 
value which is much smaller than the CJ pressure.  
The value of PF is much less than the CJ pressure 
and  its  effect  is  felt  only  well  after  the  reaction 
zone.  The  freeze  pressure  value  thus  does  not 
Fig 7. DAX  copper  foil  velocity  on  axis  for  RX55-BP at 1.859 gcc with a Kel-F binder.  Note that 
the  initial  jump-off  velocity  and  the  acceleration 
are lower for the copper foil than for the aluminum 
Fig 8. DAX  copper  foil  velocity  on  axis  for  RX55-BT at 1.833 gcc with a Viton binder. 
Next  we  show  how  well  our  model  matches 
the  lower  velocity  and  longer  time  scale  copper 
cylinder  data.    Figure  9  compares  RX-55-BS 
experimental data and simulation results. The wall 
acceleration is much reduced and lasts for tens of 
microseconds instead of just a few microseconds 
as was the case for the DAX experiments.   
Fig 9. Copper cylinder wall velocity for RX-55-BS 
at 1.861 gcc with a Kel-F binder. 
The  good  agreement  with  both  the  copper 
cylinder wall velocity and the DAX foil velocity is 
an indication of the accuracy of our modeling for 
the  reaction  zone  the  CJ  pressure  and  the  late 
time pressure release wave. 
We  have  shown  here  how  chemistry  based 
modeling  for  LLM-105  based  explosives  can  be 
used  to  treat  the  different  formulations  binders 
densities and time scales.  Our CHEETAH model 
agrees well with breakout timing short time scale 
DAX foil acceleration and long time scale copper 
cylinder  wall  acceleration.  We  plan  on  using  this 
model to predict how energy delivery is modified 
by  changes  in  density  contaminants  and  binders 
for new formulations and experiments with  LLM105.. 
This work performed under the auspices of the U. 
S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore 
National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC5207NA27344. Acceleration of Planar Flyers by Explosives Heavily Loaded with Inert Materials
Jason Loiseau William Georges David L. Frost and Andrew J. Higgins
McGill University 817 Sherbrooke St. W. Montreal QC Canada H3A 0C3
Abstract. Experiments measuring the velocity history of planar yer plates driven via
grazing detonation of non-conventional high explosives laden with inert additives were
conducted. The systems considered were packed beds of glass steel or tungsten particles
saturated with sensitized nitromethane gelled nitromethane mixed with varying mass fractions of glass microballoons and steel particles and C4 with varying mass fractions of steel
particles. Additionally the Gurney curve for homogeneous sensitized nitromethane was
evaluated. Excellent agreement between the Gurney model and the terminal velocity of
nitromethane driven yers was obtained over a wide range of explosive mass to yer mass
ratios. The Gurney model was also extended to include the inuence of the inert additives
by assuming detonation product and additive velocities equilibrate terminally. Agreement
in this case was only qualitative for some congurations suggesting that thermalization
and momentum transfer within the ow play an important role in determining the terminal
velocity of the yer. However terminal yer velocity was largely observed to be governed
by the mass of the explosive component in the system with additive mass fraction additive
density and particle size playing only secondary roles.
The accuracy of equations of state tted to cylinder test data hinges on the fact that detonation product expansion for most conventional high explosives HEs is similar in that the overall process
can be qualitatively described by a polytropic expansion starting from the CJ conditions where the
ratio of specic heats  is approximately equal
to three. Furthermore the variation of  with volumetric expansion of the detonation products is
similar for most conventional explosives and this
variation is well modeled by existing equations of
state1. However the predictive capability of hydrocodes employing these equations of state falters
when they are applied to model non-conventional
energetic mixtures composed of conventional HEs
heavily laden with dense materials such as tungsten
lead or steel particles. This failure is primarily the
result of a dramatic difference in the detonation conditions and product expansion compared to conventional HEs caused by the introduction of these dense
additives. The detonation and product expansion
behavior of HEs heavily loaded with dense additives
is complex due to momentum transfer and thermalization between the added particles and gaseous detonation products. In such systems the detonation
wave is smeared out compared to a classic ZNDCJ detonation due to the propagation of detonation
wavelets around the particles shock transmission
and detonation re-initiation across individual particles and a lack of thermal and momentum equilib
1381
rium over the timescale of both the detonation process and the near-eld product expansion most relevant to yer plate launching. Although particles
may quickly accelerate to near the gaseous product velocity early in the expansion thermalization
and momentum transfer to and from the particles
continues throughout the process. This multiphase
non-equilibrium results in large average values of
gamma   6-8 and the variation of  is expected
to differ signicantly from conventional HEs2.
The implication of non-equilibrium thermal and
momentum transport between particles and detonating HE has previously been studied with the goal
of understanding the decits in detonation pressure
and velocity that occur in these systems2 3 4 5 6.
Other studies have focused on particle-HE interactions to better predict the explosive dispersal of particles and their effect on blast loading7 8 9 10. Less
work has been done on examining the yer plate
launching behavior of these non-conventional explosives where near-eld product expansion dominates yer acceleration. Voskoboinikov experimentally examined the terminal yer velocity decrements caused by adding a wide variety of additives
in both grazing and normal launch congurations
however the results were only analyzed in the context of the additive approximation and initial free
surface velocity and only thin plates  1-1.5 mm
were used11. Kato studied the metal driving potential of tungsten laden explosives overdriven by an
outer cladding of conventional HE12 13.
The current study extends prior work14 on packed
beds of particles saturated with nitromethane NM
to systems containing dispersed additives in gelled
Experimental Details
A render and photograph of the charge geometry
are depicted in Figures 1 and 2 respectively.
Heterodyne Laser Interferometry was employed
to measure the ballistic trajectory of planar yer
plates swept by a grazing detonation within the test
explosive. A standard Fourier Transform analysis
PDV was used to extract the velocity data.
most experiments the optical collimator for the laser
beam was mounted within a support base perpendicular to the initial position of the yer surface.
For select experiments where the launch angle of
Line-wave generator 
Fig. 1. Rendering of the charge.
yer was substantial additional collimators were
mounted parallel to the initial position of the yer
surface and parallel to the estimated launch vector
to properly resolve the absolute yer velocity.
The yer and explosive system were suspended
above the base by two PVC slabs with screw tabs.
The grazing detonation was initiated via a multichannel line wave generator LWG to ensure planarity. The LWG was lled with 90 NM and 10
diethylenetriamine by weight.
the apex by a strip of rubberized explosive to ensure planarity through the thickness. The test explosive was separated from the LWG with a thin
1.5 mm clear PVC spacer. The explosive reservoir was 175 mm long and 95 mm wide. Typically the reservoir thickness was 24.13 mm however some thinner reservoirs were used to vary the
charge to yer mass ratio. The yer plate thickness
was 6.35 mm except where specied. The top of the
reservoir was sealed with a 3 mm clear PVC lid.
To mitigate against loss in velocity and nonuniformity in explosive loading due to lateral expansion edge effects the yer was surrounded by
a ring of aluminum of equal thickness to the yer.
In principle this allowed for the main yer to uniformly accelerate free of edge effects while the mechanically decoupled ring lagged behind.
Gurney Analysis for Sensitized Nitromethane
The analytic framework rst proposed by Gurney
and later expanded upon by numerous others provides a useful tool for calculating the terminal velocity at which yers are launched15 16 17. Gur
1382
The terminal velocity of the yer is given by
2E is the experimentally determined Gurney
energy M is the mass per unit area of the yer C
is the mass per unit area of explosive and N is the
mass per unit area of the tamper.
In the case of a grazing detonation the yer is
launched at total velocity V  with a component of
forward velocity at an angle of  from its original
orientation as described by the Taylor model16 and
depicted in Figure 4.
Fig. 2. Photograph of a charge employing a 4 collimator array to resolve the orientation of the yer.
neys method distills the gasdynamic launch of a
yer into a simple terminal partition of the chemical energy of the explosive into kinetic energy of the
yer tamper and the expanding detonation products. The detonation product expansion is simplied by assuming a linear velocity gradient and uniform density. This allows for the integration of expressions for energy and momentum conservation
to produce scaling laws that are a function only of
the charge geometry the ratio of explosive mass to
yer and tamper masses and a characteristic energy
of the explosive. A schematic of the Gurney model
for a planar conguration of explosive sandwiched
between two plates is depicted in Figure 3.
Fig. 3. Depiction of Gurney model geometry.
Fig. 4. Depiction of Taylor angle analysis.
Following the analysis presented by Souers et al.
for PDV measurements of the cylinder test18 because the interferometer measures the component
of material velocity along the laser beam path represented by the red line in Figure 4 the absolute
velocity is related to the measured velocity via the
angle . Souers proposed that   2 and consequently the velocity measured by a collimator positioned normally Vpdv can be simply related to the
absolute velocity V by
A series of yer plate experiments were conducted using nitromethane sensitized with 10 diethylenetriamine DETA by weight for values of
MC ranging from 0.08 to 4.65 to validate the experimental method and conrm the accuracy of the
Gurney model in the present geometry. Flyer velocity was estimated via Equation 1 including the
small tamping effect of the PVC lid. A density of
1.12 gcc and a Gurney energy of 2.35 kms were
used for the explosive. The Gurney energy was estimated by scaling the published value of 2.41 kms
for homogeneous NM to account for the small energetic decrement from the DETA addition16. Taylor
angle was computed via sin2  V 2D where
D is the detonation velocity measured along the
length of the charge to be 6076 ms via self-shorting
twisted wire pairs. The results are summarized in
Table 1 and a comparison to the estimates from the
untamped and asymmetric sandwich Gurney equations is shown in Figure 5.
Charge to flyer mass ratio MC
Fig. 5. Plot of measured velocity versus untamped
and tamped Gurney model predictions.
Overall agreement is quite good with an average
error of less than 5 and the results compare favorably to prior studies reporting similar accuracy19.
The Gurney model consistently underpredicts the
terminal velocity for large explosive loadings of
thin yers. The absolute velocity was calculated
from the measured velocity assuming the validity
of the Taylor angle estimation. For launches with
small Taylor angles the magnitude of the correction is minuscule. We validated the Taylor angle
for the 3.2 mm yer propelled to a normal velocity of 2023 ms via calibration as a planar impactor
and the angle deviated by 0.7 from the theoreti
cal prediction. For the 0.8 mm yer accelerated to
3598 ms the angle  and absolute velocity were
measured directly via orthogonal PDV probes. In
correlating this value with  via Equation 3 a larger
discrepancy of 4.6 is observed. The normal and
forward velocity histories are plotted in Figure 6.
Perpendicular Collimator
Fig. 6. Velocity history of a 0.8 mm aluminum yer
as measured by probes normal and tangential to the
initial position of the yer surface.
Modied Gurney Equation Including Inert Additives
To provide a rst order analysis to better frame
the effect of inert additive addition we considered
a modication of the Gurney model to include simplied kinematics of the accelerated particles. Consider the conservation of kinetic energy for the
explosive-yer-particle system
And the momentum equation for the system
Where me is the mass of explosive E is the specic energy of the explosive related to the Gurney
Table 1. Summary of results for nitromethane experiments.
Reservoir MC NC Gurney ms
2E mm is the mass of the yer Vm is
the velocity of the yer Vg and Vb are the velocities
of the product gases and particles respectively g
and b are the density of the products and the additive respectively and g and b are the volume fractions of detonation product and beads in the control
volume respectively. Note that y is a Lagrangian
coordinate relative to the yer-explosive interface.
To obtain a Gurney Equation from these augmented equations it was assumed that the particle
and gas velocity are equal and both follow the classic Gurney linear velocity prole. While this is
an admittedly crude assumption given the presumed
importance of momentum differential between particles and detonation products it is not entirely unrealistic given the rapid acceleration of the particles
over the timescale relevant to yer plate acceleration. It is also assumed the particle distribution remains uniform throughout the expansion to maintain compatibility with the uniform density assumption of the original Gurney model. This allows the
density and volume fraction terms to be moved outside of the integral and simplied accordingly
Where Yo is the arbitrary thickness of the fully expanded products e is the initial thickness of the
explosive mixture and bi is the initial volume fraction of the additive.
This allows for a solution to the energy and momentum equation following a similar procedure to
the standard Gurney analysis. The following equation is obtained
M and C are the mass per unit area of the yer
and the explosive component of the mixture respectively and e is the initial volume fraction of explo
sive. The mass per unit area of the explosive component is eee and the Gurney energy 
equal to the value for the homogeneous explosive.
Results for packed beds saturated with NM
A slurry explosive can be made by saturating
packed beds of inert particles with sensitized nitromethane. The packed particle bed approximates
a xed volume fraction over a wide range of particle sizes meaning that the explosive mass when
the bed is saturated with liquid explosive remains
relatively constant. Such a conguration provides
a means of assessing the effect of additive density
and particle size on yer acceleration. Three particle materials were considered glass   2.2 gcc
steel   7.9 gcc and tungsten   18.5 gcc
thereby varying the density by nearly an order of
magnitude. Two particle sizes were considered for
Most beds had similar packing fractions generating a typical variation in explosive mass of no more
than 10 g with an average of 180 g. The tungsten
powder used had a wide size distribution and included a large population of  10 m particles that
prevented complete settling and thus resulted in a
lower packing fraction and larger explosive mass.
The PDV traces for all ve experiments are
shown in Figure 7 and the details of mass and volume fractions as well as detonation velocities and
yer terminal velocities are summarized in Table 2.
The spread in terminal velocities is comparatively
small V  200 ms thereby proving that yer
velocity is largely governed by the mass of energetic
component. Additive density provides a secondary
effect of reducing yer velocity. For very dense
additives the decrement is signicant. This is apparent from the tungsten experiment which yielded
the lowest yer velocity on an absolute basis despite having more explosive due to the lower packing fraction.
Fig. 7. Velocity histories for yers propelled by saturated packed beds.
In all cases the detonation pressure and detonation velocity were sufciently low that the launch
was shockless. The yer acceleration is largely similar for the steel and glass experiments regardless of
particle size. However the tungsten experiment accelerated signicantly slower. The primary difference in the acceleration for similar experiments is
the timescale at which the driving pressure decays
which in turn causes acceleration to drop dramatically. This decay occurs at a slightly later time for
the larger particles.
In the case of the steel particles a small secondary acceleration is observed
after the velocity initially begins to asymptote. A
larger secondary acceleration in the small particle
case causes the terminal velocities of the two steel
experiments to reach nearly identical values. These
secondary accelerations are not present in the glass
experiments resulting in signicant enhancement in
yer terminal velocity with increasing particle size.
Table 2. Summary of packed bed experiments.
The experimental results of varying additive density are plotted against predictions of the modied
Gurney model in Figure 8 as normalized yer velocity versus the additive to explosive density ratio. Two model curves are plotted one which represents the average explosive volume fraction obtained in the glass and steel experiments the other
which represents the volume fraction in the tungsten
experiment. An additional point was added which
represents an experiment conducted with gelled nitromethane and heavily loaded with K1 glass microballoons GMBs with a volume fraction of 56.
Reasonable agreement was obtained for the steel
tungsten and GMB cases. However marked deviation was observed for the glass cases where the
model signicantly over-predicts the velocity.
Fig. 8. Normalized terminal velocities of packed
bed experiments as a function of density ratio plotted versus model predictions.
To ascertain the relative performance of the
packed bed explosive as a function of the mass of
the yer a series of experiments were conducted
Experiments 280 m and 3 mm dia. steel
Std. Gurney eqv. explosive mass
Charge to flyer mass ratio MC
Fig. 9. Gurney curve for the steel packed bed.
holding the explosive reservoir thickness constant
at 24.1 mm and varying the yer thickness from
0.8 mm to 19.1 mm. All reservoirs were lled
with a packed bed of the nominally 280 m diameter steel shot and saturated with sensitized nitromethane. The normalized yer velocity is plotted versus the yer mass to nitromethane mass ratio
in Figure 9. Two model curves are also plotted. The
green curve is constructed using the modied Gurney equation presented previously. The red curve
is constructed using the standard Gurney equation
and setting the value of C equal to the mass of nitromethane in the packed bed. While neither curve
accurately reproduces the data over the full range
of MC combined they bracket the data and reveal
an interesting trend. For thin yers with large loadings the packed bed explosive accelerates the yer
to a substantially lower velocity than the velocity
that would be obtained if an equivalent mass of homogeneous explosive were used. However as the
yer mass increases the resulting terminal velocity from the packed bed explosive converges toward
the velocity expected from the equivalent mass of
homogeneous explosive. This can be explained by
considering that as yer inertia increases and its acceleration is slower there is more time for particles
to accelerate and transfer momentum to the yer via
impingement. As a result the propulsive efciency
of the explosive increases because there is time for
the particles to give back energy they initially diverted from the detonation products.
Fig. 10. Spectrogram of a 6.4 mm yer accelerated
by gelled NM mixed with 12.5 GMB by mass.
Results for gelled nitromethane admixtures
In this section we discuss the acceleration of yers by nitromethane gelled with 4 Poly-methylmethacrylate PMMA by weight. To make the
gel readily detonable small quantities of glass microballoons 3M K1 are dispersed and suspended
in the gel. Signicant volume fractions of GMBs
can further be dispersed to dilute the explosive mixture and reduce detonation pressure detonation velocity and effective Gurney energy. The GMB suspension is stable over a period of hours thereby providing a tailorable explosive system that varies in
power from equivalent to a lightly amine sensitized
liquid nitromethane mixture to shockless loadings
similar to what is observed in welding explosives. A
representative PDV spectrogram from a gelled NM
experiment is depicted in Figure 10 which shows a
6.4 mm yer accelerated by a mixture of gelled NM
diluted via the addition of 12.5 GMBs by mass.
A slow shockless acceleration is readily apparent.
GMB mass fraction was varied from 2.5 17.7
by volume to 12.5 55.5 by volume to ascertain the effect of dilution by low density additives.
As expected GMB addition lowered both the density and effective Gurney energy of the explosive
resulting in slower terminal velocities.
At high GMB loadings the explosive becomes
sufciently viscous to suspend denser additives
for the duration necessary to conduct an experiment. Experiments were performed where the
12.5 GMB mixture was further diluted by dis
1387
Model Gel NMGMBssteel
Fig. 12. Experimental terminal velocities versus the
augmented Gurney model as a function of volume
fraction versus normalized terminal velocity.
steel were progressively worked-in. Although dispersion was relatively uniform portions of unmixed
explosive remained for the large steel loadings. A
photograph of a packed charge prior to ring is depicted in Figure 13. The unmixed explosive is visible on the surface however it represents a small
fraction of the overall mixture and is thus not believed to signicantly alter the results.
The mass fraction of added steel was varied from
0 to 80. It was not possible to reach packed bed
conditions as the explosive became too crumbly to
effectively pack and there were concerns about the
ability to detonate the mixture.
The velocity histories for the 6 experiments that
were conducted are shown in Figure 14. Two experiments were conducted with unmixed C4. The
rst involved loading the entire charge reservoir
Fig. 11. Charge being loaded with a mixture of
8017.52.5 steel gelled NM and GMBs by mass.
persing varying quantities of the 280 m diameter
steel. A charge in the process of being lled by
a mixture of 80 steel by mass and 20 by mass
of the GMBgelled NM mixture is depicted in Figure 11. Steel addition had the effect of further reducing the terminal velocity and also substantially
extended the timescale over which yers continued
terminal velocities for the
GMBgelled NM and GMBsteelgelled NM mixtures are compared to predictions of the augmented
Gurney model in Figure 12. Quantitative agreement for the GMB experiments is quite good. This
may be surprising given the compressibility of the
GMBs however the volume fraction change due to
collapse of the balloons is relatively small and the
remaining material is sufciently light to rapidly accelerate to the gas velocity and lacks the inertia to
signicantly deviate from the gas velocity. However the model does not accurately reproduce the
effect of steel addition despite somewhat reproducing the trend at large mass loadings.
Results for C4 with particle addition
Experiments were conducted to ascertain the effect on yer acceleration due to the addition of increasing masses of 280 m steel particles to C4 a
relatively high Gurney energy high detonation pressure explosive. To disperse the steel particles uniformly throughout the explosive the C4 was nely
divided on a at surface and small portions of the
Fig. 13. Charge loaded with a mixture of 8020
with C4 the second consisted of evenly loading the
charge reservoir with a mass of C4 equivalent to the
mass present in the experiment with an 80 loading
of steel. These two experiments are represented by
dashed lines. A summary of the experimental mass
fractions detonation velocities mass of C4 and terminal velocity is shown in Table 3.
Table 3. Summary of results for C4 experiments.
b Mass C4 VOD Vpdv ms
C4 no particles low loading
Fig. 14. Acceleration histories of yers propelled by
C4 loaded with varying quantities of steel particles.
A clear progression is observed throughout the
experiments. For the unmixed explosives a discontinuous jump in particle velocity up to  1000 ms
was observed corresponding to the breakout of the
oblique shock driven into the yer by the detonation wave. A similar jump is observed in the 15
loading as the additive is so dispersed that the reduction in detonation pressure is minor. Successive
increases in steel loading result in corresponding reductions in initial shock breakout velocity and yer
terminal velocity. At the highest loading 80 the
detonation velocity is subsonic relative to the sound
speed of the yer material and no clear shock breakout can be observed in the PDV trace.
A lower terminal velocity was obtained in the experiment with 80 steel compared to the equivalent experiment containing homogeneous C4. This
is consistent with previously discussed results for
nitromethane saturated particle beds14. In this case
some of the velocity decrement can be explained by
a lower particle velocity from shock breakout. The
effect of steel addition is well predicted by the modied Gurney model as can be seen in Figure 12.
A charge design to launch yers via grazing detonation was developed to measure the acceleration
behavior and terminal velocity for explosives heavily diluted with inert additives. The charge was used
to evaluate the relationship between terminal velocity and the ratio of explosive mass to yer mass for
a homogeneous explosive. These results were compared very favorably to the classic Gurney model.
This simultaneously validated the model and suggested that the experimental design sufciently mitigated lateral expansion and perturbations from the
line wave generator initiator.
The primary effects of additive addition are a reduction in terminal velocity and slower yer acceleration. For relatively thin yers systems with large
volume fractions of additives propel yers to significantly lower velocities than an equivalent mass of
neat explosive. However as the yer gets thicker the
propulsive efciency asymptotes towards and may
exceed the efciency of the equivalent neat explosive mass. This is believed to be due to an increase
in particle momentum transfer due to the higher inertia of the heavy yer. Secondary inuences include additive density which relatively decreases
yer velocity as well as particle size which has
an ambiguous effect depending on the specic additive.
A modication of the Gurney model to include
terms for the acceleration of inert additive particles
was developed. The best agreement was obtained
for very light GMBs whose compressed material
is sufciently light to rapidly accelerate in the ow.
The model only qualitatively predicted all trends in
the experimental data illustrating that the assump
1389
tion of prompt equilibration of the particles within
the expanding detonation products is only partially
valid. However terminal yer velocity was largely
observed to be governed by the mass of the explosive component in the system which is a fundamental effect captured by the Gurney model.Aluminum Reactions in Detonation Products of Nitromethane - Aluminun Mixtures
Yukio Kato Kenji Murata and Noriyuki Kaga 
Nippon Koki Co. Ltd. 
2-1 Dobu Nagasaka Nishigo-mura Nishishirakawa-gun Fukushima-ken 961-8686 Japan 
Abstract. The temperature of detonation products of nitromethane loaded with 15 wt. 
or 30 wt. of either aluminum particle or lithium fluoride particle was measured using 
time-resolved optical pyrometer. Lithium fluoride was used as inert simulant of aluminum. 
The  temperature  increase  due  to  the  aluminum  reaction  in  gaseous  detonation  products
was  estimated  from  the  difference  of  temperatures  between  nitromethane-aluminum 
mixtures  and  nitromethane-lithium  fluoride  mixtures  loaded  with  the  same  amount  of 
particulate.  The  extent  and  rate  of  aluminum  reaction  were  calculated  from  the
temperature increase. In nitromethane loaded with 15 wt. 10 Pm size aluminum 75  
of aluminum was reacted and in nitromethane loaded with 30 wt. of aluminum 68  of 
aluminum was reacted within the timeframe of 2 Ps. The rate of aluminum reaction was 
very fast during first 11.5 Ps and then it was considerably slowed down. The aluminum 
reaction  took  longer  time  to  complete  in  the  expanding  detonation  products  after  2  Ps
behind  detonation  front.  This  results  suggests  the  long  total  burn  time  of aluminum 
particle estimated by the results of cylinder tests.cid3
Aluminum Al particle has been widely used 
to  improve  the  performances  of  explosives  in 
many  applications  such  as  air  blast  cratering 
Detonation  properties  of  aluminized  explosives 
have been extensively studied over the last decades. 
Particularly during the last decade a large number 
of  experimental  and 
theoretical  studies  were 
performed to understand the blast enhancement by 
Al  reaction  in  the  expanding  detonation  products 
and  surrounding  atmosphere.  To  elucidate  the 
mechanism of blast enhancement it is necessary to 
obtain  the  information  on  the  Al  reaction  in 
detonation  wave  and  post-detonation  expansion. 
Although  a  significant  amount  of  research  has 
focused  on  the  Al  reaction  in  low  pressure 
conditions  still  a  limited  number  of  studies  have 
been  devoted  to  the  Al  reaction  in  high  pressure 
regime behind detonation front. 
The  Al  reaction  in  the  early  expansion  of 
detonation  products  within  the  timeframe  of  first 
2040 Ps has been measured by means of cylinder 
tests.  Finger  et  al.1  performed  cylinder  tests  of 
composite  explosives  composed  of  HMXAl 
binder  and  showed  that  50    of  5  Pm  size  Al 
particle  was  reacted  within  20  Ps.  Baudin  et  al.2
511930  composition  and  estimated  that  30   
of 16 Pm size Al particle was reacted within 20 Ps.
Milne  et  al.3 analyzed  the  cylinder  tests  of 
nitromethane  NM  loaded  with  Al  particle  and 
concluded  that  the  burn  time  of  5  Pm  size  Al 
particle  was  5075  Ps.  However  it  is  impossible 
to estimate the Al reaction in the first few seconds 
of  expansion  from  the  results  of  cylinder  tests. 
Recently  Manner  et  al.4  compared  the  cylinder 
wall  velocity  of  cast  PBX  composed  of 
691516  and  HMXlithium 
fluoride  LiFbinder  691516  and  showed  that 
the  cylinder  wall  velocity  for  PBX  containing  Al 
was 13  higher than PBX containing LiF at 2 Ps 
and  20    higher  at  20  Ps.  These  results 
demonstrated  that  the  important  part  of  3.2  Pm
size Al particle was reacted within the first 2 Ps.
the  reaction  rate  of  Al 
To determine the early time reaction rate of Al 
particle  Tao  et  al.5  conducted  a  systematic  study 
composite explosives consisting of PETN or TNT 
mixed  with  either  5  or  18  Pm  size  Al  particle. 
They measured the interface particle velocity or Ta 
metal  free  surface  velocity  using  Fabry-Pero 
configuration such that detonation behavior within 
the  experimental  timeframe  of  several Ps  remains 
one-dimensional without perturbations from radial 
rarefactions.  Their  results  showed  that  5  to  20 
wt. of 5 Pm size Al in PETN and 5 to 10 wt. of 
5 Pm  size  Al  in  TNT  were  reacted  completely 
Kato and Brochet6 measured the temperatures 
of  detonation  products  of  NM  Al  mixtures  and 
showed  that  the  important  part  of  10  Pm  size  Al 
reacted  within  the  first  2  Ps.  In  this  paper  the 
temperatures of detonation products of NMAl and 
NMLiF mixtures were measured and compared to 
study  the  extent  and  rate  of  Al  reaction  in  the 
experimental timeframe of 2 Ps. 
The  temperatures  of  detonation  products  of 
NMAl and NMLiF mixtures were measured with 
time-resolved  optical  pyrometer  to  estimate  the 
rate and extent of aluminum reaction in early time 
expansion of detonation products. Medium particle 
size  of  Al  and  LiF  powder  were  respectively  10 
and  44  Pm.  LiF  particle  was  used  as  an  inert 
substitute  for  Al  particle  because  LiF  has  similar 
molecular  weight  density  and  shock  Hugoniot  to 
Al.  NM  was  thickened  by  addition  of  3  wt. 
PMMA used as gelling agent. Al and LiF of 15 or 
30  wt.  were  mixed  with  gelled  NM.  Sample 
mixtures  were  contained  in  brass  detonation  tube 
of  18  mm  in  inner  diameter  20  mm  in  outer 
diameter  and  100  mm  in  length.  Detonation  tube 
had 10 mm thick optical glass window on one end 
and solid booster explosive on the other end. It is 
known  that  transparency  of  glass  window  under 
shock  loading  is  maintained  until  shattered  by 
tension waves. In the case of a 10 mm thick glass 
measurements is about 2 Ps.
The  optical  pyrometer  was  composed  of 
interferential  filter  center 
wavelength  657  nm  band  width  at  half  peak 
transmission  10  nm  silicon  photodetector  and 
amplifier.  This  optical  pyrometer  was  calibrated 
using tungsten ribbon lump at 2800 K and carbon 
arc  at  3400  K.  Time  resolution  of  this  optical 
pyrometer  was  about  10  ns  and  the  accuracy  of 
measurements  was  100150  K  in  temperature 
Results and Discussion 
Typical  records  of  detonation  temperature 
measurements  of  gelled  NM  and  NMAl  8515 
mixture are presented in Fig. 1. For detonation in 
gelled  NM  the  record  shows  short  overdriven 
detonation  after  initiation  part  A  steady  state 
detonation propagation part B and the expansion 
of  detonation  products  after  the  interaction  with 
glass  window  part  C.  In  part  A  and  B  the 
thermal  radiation  emitted  by  detonation  front  is 
recorded through unreacted gelled NM and in part 
C  the  thermal  radiation  from  reaction  products  is 
recorded.  Because  NMAl  mixtures  are  opaque 
only  the  thermal  radiation  emitted  by  detonation 
products  is  recorded  after  the  detonation  front 
interaction  with  glass  window.  The  records  for 
NMAl  mixtures  show  an  increase  in  thermal 
radiation  which  is  characteristic  of  Al  reaction  in 
detonation products. 
The  time-resolved  temperatures  of detonation 
products  of  NMAl  and  NMLiF  mixtures  are 
shown  in  Fig.  2.  The  measured  temperatures  of 
detonation products are free from the influence of 
side  rarefaction  waves  during  about  2  Ps  in  our 
experimental conditions. The records of detonation 
temperature  measurements  of  NMLiF  mixtures 
are  similar  to  those  of  NM  and  gelled  NM  as 
unreacted NMLiF mixtures are semi-transparent. 
The  measured  detonation  front  temperatures  of 
gelled  NM  loaded  with  15  or  30  wt.  LiF  are 
respectively 140 or 230 K lower than that of gelled 
NM  Table  1.  While  CJ  temperatures  of  NM 
loaded  with  15  or  30  wt.  Al  calculated  using 
KHT thermochemical code supposing Al inert and 
in  thermal  equilibrium  with  gaseous  detonation 
products are respectively 336 or 649 K lower than 
that of NM. These results indicate the existence of 
the  extended  high  pressure  zone  behind  leading 
shock  wave  for  NMLiF  mixtures  which  was 
observed in the pressure measurements of NMAl 
mixtures7.These  results  also  suggest  that  LiF 
particle is not in thermal equilibrium with gaseous 
detonation  products  in  reaction  zone  of  NM.  The 
temperatures  of  detonation  products  of  NMLiF 
mixtures decrease very fast during first 0.2 Ps and 
then  the rate of  temperature decrease  slows  down 
during  next  2  Ps  It  is  inferred  from  this  fact  that 
LiF  particle  attains  thermal  equilibrium  with 
gaseous detonation products very rapidly. 
temperatures  of  NMAl 
mixtures are lower than those of NMLiF mixtures 
during  first  0.10.2  Ps  and  do  not  represent  real 
detonation front temperature because unreacted Al 
particle  partially  mask 
emitted  by  detonation 
front.  The  measured 
temperatures  of  detonation  products  also  do  not 
represent  real  temperature  before  the  initiation  of 
Al reaction by the same reason. After the ignition 
of  Al  reaction  reaction  products  of  Al  such  as 
Al2O3 attain immediately thermal equilibrium with 
other  gaseous  products  and 
detonation  products  even  if  the  temperature  of 
unreacted core of Al particle is lower. In the case 
of NMAl 8515 mixture  
Fig.1. Typical records of temperature measurements 
for gelled NM and NMAl8515 mixture. 
Fig.2. Time - resolved temperatures of detonation 
products of NMAl and NMLiF mixtures. 
Table 1. Comparison between measured detonation front Temperatures of NMLiF mixtures and 
calculated CJ temperatures of NMAl  inert  mixtures. 
Measured detonation front temperature 
Calculated CJ temperature 
the measured temperature decreases slightly during 
first 0.1 Ps and then tends to increase fast during 
next  1.5  Ps  followed  by  slight 
decrease.  Yoshinaka  et  al.8 revealed  by  shock 
recovery  experiments  that  thin  oxide  layer  of  Al 
particle  was  damaged  and  removed  under  the 
loading of shock pressure of 2030 GPa and that 
bare  Al  was  exposed.  The  reaction  rate  of  Al 
controlled by diffusion of oxidizer to the surface of 
Al  particle.  The  reaction  of  Al  particle  starts 
immediately  when  the  temperature  of  Al  particle 
arrives  at  melting  point  of  Al.  The  ignition  delay 
of Al reaction is estimated to be shorter than 0.2 Ps. 
temperature  increases  very  fast  during  first  1  Ps
and then remains constant following 1 Ps.
in  gaseous  detonation  products 
The  difference  of  detonation  products 
temperatures between NMAl mixture and NMLiF 
the  same  amount  of 
particulate represents the temperature increase due 
to  the  energy  released  from  Al  reaction  in 
detonation  products.  The  temperature  increase  for 
NMAl  mixtures  loaded  with  15  and  30  wt.  Al 
are presented in Fig. 3. The fraction of reacted Al 
is considered to be proportional to the temperature 
increase by Al reaction. The fraction of reacted Al 
can be estimated by following equation 
TNMAl cid15915  TNMLiF
TCJ Al reacted  TCJ Al inert
temperatures  supposing  Al  fully 
reacted  and  inert  were  calculated  using  KHT 
thermochemical  code  Table  2.  The  fractions  of 
reacted Al for NMAl mixtures loaded with 15 and 
30 wt. Al are shown in Fig. 4. 
For  NMAl  8515  mixture  the  fraction  of 
reacted  Al  increases  fast  during  first  1.5  Ps  and 
remains  almost  constant  after  1.5  Ps  and  about 
75    of  Al  is  reacted  in  2Ps.  While  for  NMAl 
the  fraction  of  reacted  Al 
continues to increase during 2 Ps and about 68  
of Al is reacted in 2 Ps. Tao et al.5 determined the 
early  time  rate  of  energy  release  in  PETNAl  and 
TNTAl  composite  explosives  and  estimated  the 
rate of Al reaction.  
Table 2. Calculated CJ temperature of NMAl 
Fig.3. Temperature increase by Al reaction for  
Fig.4. Fraction of reacted aluminum as a function 
They concluded that for PETNAl compositions 5 
to 20 wt. of 5 Pm size Al reacts fully within 1 Ps
while  7580    of  5  to  20  wt.  18  Pm  size  Al 
reacts  in  the  same  timeframe  and  for  TNTAl 
compositions 5 to 10 wt. of 5 Pm size Al reacts 
completely within 1 Ps while 7580  of 5 to 10 
wt. 18 Pm size Al reacts in the same timeframe. 
The  estimated  fraction  of  reacted  Al  in  NMAl 
mixtures is in good agreement with that in TNTAl 
compositions  by  Tao  et  al.5  as  the  detonation 
temperature of NM is close to that of TNT. 
Very  rapid  slowdown  of  the  Al  reaction  rate 
was  considered  to  be  caused  by  the  pressure 
decrease  the  decrease  of  oxidizer  concentration 
and  the  decrease  of  Al  mass  depletion  rate.  The 
pressure of detonation products was decreased due 
to Taylor rarefaction wave in 2 Ps according to the 
results  of  pressure  measurements7  and  pressure 
decrease  was  accelerated  by  the  effect  of  side 
rarefaction  waves  due  to  the  expansion  of  tube 
after  2  Ps.  A  large  amount  of  oxidizer  gas  was 
consumed  and  oxidizer  gas  concentration  was 
considerably  decreased  until  1.52  Ps.  The  mass 
depletion  rate  of  Al  particle  was  proportional  to 
square  of  Al  particle  diameter  and  radial  burning 
rate of Al particle if the reaction of Al particle was 
considered  to  be  surface  reaction.  The  mass 
depletion  rate  of  Al  particle  was  slowed  down 
rapidly with the decrease of diameter of Al particle. 
From  these  results  the  rate  of  Al  reaction  was 
shown  to  be  dependent  on  the  pressure  and 
concentration of oxidizer.     
The rate of Al reaction is very fast during first 
11.5 Ps and then it is considerably slowed down. 
The  Al  reaction  takes  longer  time  to  complete  in 
the  expanding  detonation  products  after  2  Ps
behind  detonation  front.  This  fact  suggests  the 
long total burn time of Al particle estimated from 
the results of cylinder tests. 
In  this  study  the  temperatures  of  detonation 
products  of  NM  loaded  with  either  Al  particle  or 
LiF  particle  were  measured  using  time-resolved 
optical pyrometer. The temperature increase by Al 
reaction  was  estimated  from  the  difference  of 
temperatures  of  detonation  products  between 
NMAl  mixtures  and  NMLiF  mixtures  and  the 
fraction  of  reacted  Al  was  calculated  using  the 
estimated temperature increase. In NMAl 8515 
mixture about 75  of 10 Pm size Al particle was 
reacted within 2 Ps and in NMAl 7030 mixture 
about 68  of 10 Pm size Al particle was reacted 
in the same timeframe. The reaction rate of Al was 
very  fast  during  first  11.5  Ps  and  then  it  was 
largely slowed down. The reaction rate of Al was 
shown  to  be  dependent  on  the  pressure  and  
concentration of oxidizer. It was demonstrated that 
temperature  measurements  using  time-resolved 
optical  pyrometer  is  valuable  tool  to  estimate  the 
extent  and  rate  of  Al  reaction  in  detonation 
products. Larger scale experiments are expected to 
investigate the reaction of Al in longer timeframe. The Effect of Aluminum on the Explosive Performance of Different Chlorate-based 
Lee Glascoe Sabrina DePiero Bruce Watkins Steve Alves and Joe Tringe 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore California USA 
Bryce Tappan and Virginia Manner 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos New Mexico USA 
Abstract.  A  range  of  explosive  performance  experiments  were  conducted  using  both 
stoichiometric and off-stoichiometric potassium chlorate KC mixtures with the addition 
of aluminum  detonability rate stick tests for detonation velocity kinetic  plate  tests for 
close-in  impulse  and  barometric  calorimetry  tests  for  time  evolving  impulse.  The 
addition of aluminum to otherwise stoichiometric chlorate mixtures resulting in fuel rich 
mixtures increased performance in some tests but not in others. For rate stick tests as the 
ratio of aluminum to fuel increases the detonation velocity decreases. Impulse evaluated 
by close-in kinetic plate tests on a liquid fuel mixed with KC was greater for mixtures 
containing  aluminum  and  barometric  calorimetry  showed  similar  enhancement  at  late 
time  with  aluminum.  As  long  as  the  mixture  is  oxygen  balanced  prior  to  adding  the 
aluminum there does not appear to be any degradation in performance with aluminum in 
the  formulation  up  to  a  certain  percent.  Those  mixtures  have  equivalent  or  greater 
performance than the same mixtures without aluminum.  
Aluminum is often included as an additive to a 
chlorate-based  formulation  where  another  fuel  is 
present rather than as the lone fuel in combination 
with potassium chlorate KC or another oxidizer.1 
Aluminized  explosives  are  typically  non-ideal 
with long sequential reaction zones that depend on 
particle size and other factors such explosives are 
pressures  or  brisance  but  higher  overall  blast 
potential due to later time combustive effects.  As 
electropositive  metallic 
elements  aluminum  oxidation 
strongly  exothermic.  In  the  case  of  KC  and 
aluminum  a  balanced  reaction  assuming  full 
conversion  of  the  aluminum-to-aluminum  oxide 
Al2O3 is as follows 
KClO3  2 Al   KCl  Al2O3  
Aluminum  present  in  an  explosive  formulation 
may or may not participate fully in the detonation 
of  the  explosive.  Depending  on  the  formulation 
and  its  physical  characteristics  aluminum  may 
react  slowly  compared  to  the  timescale  of  a 
detonation and because of this the aluminum that 
is  present  may  not  be  fully  converted  to  Al2O3. 
Even if it is fully converted to aluminum oxide the 
rate  of  reaction  may  be  such  that  the  aluminum 
contributes  primarily  to  late-time  afterburn  and 
little to the blast properties of the formulation. The 
aluminum may also form Al2O3 through reactions 
with  water  and  carbon  dioxide  formed  from  the 
reaction  of  KC  with  another  fuel  present  rather 
than via direct reaction with the KC. Predicting the 
blast  properties  of  an  aluminized  KCfuel 
formulation  is  therefore  less  straightforward  than 
predicting those of a binary KCfuel formulation. 
To  assess  possible  blast  enhancement  using 
aluminum  as  an  additive 
experiments were devised by Lawrence Livermore 
National  Laboratory  LLNL  and  Los  Alamos 
National  Laboratory  LANL.  Traditional  rate 
sticks  were  used  to  assess  the  influence  of 
aluminum  additive  on  detonation.  To  assess  later 
time processes where aluminum may enhance blast 
through combustion the kinetic plate test was used 
to  assess  overall  impulse  imparted  to  a  rigid 
structure and the barometric calorimeter was used 
to assess the temporal aspect of adding aluminum 
including late-time quasi-static combustion effects.   
For  our  recent  exhaustive  study  on  KCfuel 
explosives we investigated seven different organic 
fuels  both  of  liquid  and  granular  form  as  well  as 
many  different  additives 
including  different 
aluminum content levels. A solid granular fuel was 
mixed  with  KC  for  the  rate  stick  and  calorimeter 
studies  while  a  liquid  fuel  was  mixed  for  the 
kinetic plate study. A key property of the fuels is 
oxygen  content  which  varies  from  0  in  pure 
hydrocarbons to more than 51 by weight in some 
In  the  tests  discussed  here  aluminum  was 
added  to  KCfuel  mixtures.  Some  mixtures  were 
balanced  to  form  CO2  H2O  and  Al2O3  with 
sufficient  KC  as  a  direct  oxidizer  for  all  of  the 
contained  aluminumthese  were  identified  as 
stoichiometric  mixtures.  Aluminum  was  also 
added to mixtures that were otherwise balanced to 
form  CO2  and  H2O  both  of  which  can  act  as 
efficient oxidizers for Althese were identified as 
fuel-rich.  The  fuel-rich  formulations  optimally 
utilize  Al  because  they  maximize  energy  release 
as  well  as  gas  production.  When  KC  directly 
oxidizes Al all resulting products are solid which 
decreases  the  amount  of  work  that  the  explosive 
formulation can do. However the reaction of CO2 
and  H2O  with  Al  produces  C  CO  and  H2  and 
these  species  may  act  as  fuels  that  reignite  in  air 
and couple that energy to the blast wave. 
Remote Rate Stick Experiment Design 
Rate  stick  tests  were  performed  on  fuel-rich 
fuel-lean  and  stoichiometric 
measure  the  detonation  velocities  of  un-boosted 
formulations as a function of KCfuelAl mix ratio. 
The  results  obtained  provide  part  of  a  broad 
overview of the detonation spaces associated with 
Fig.  1.  Tank  set  up  for  remote  operations    a 
LEXI  iRobot  b  Steel  garage  that  houses  the 
LabRam c shot stand. 
tank  for  safety  and 
Preparation  and  firing  of  the  aluminized  KC 
mixtures  were  done 
consistency between experiments all formulations 
were  prepared  mixed  and  packed  similarly. 
Figure 1 is a photograph of the inside of the tank 
prior  to  operations.  The  tank  contains  a  steel 
garage or blast shield which houses and protects 
the LabRam acoustic mixer the shot stand where 
the  detonability  test  is  done  and  LEXI  a 
Packbot  510  iRobot  which  is  used  to  remotely 
deliver mixed material from the LabRam.  
After  remote  mixing 
delivers  the  mixed  cylinder  to  an  outer  Lucite 
cylinder on the shot stand. The tank is then opened 
so that LEXI can exit the tank whereupon the tank 
is closed. The detonator assembly is then remotely 
placed  into  the  mixing  cylinder.  The  detonator 
holder  is  also  used  to  tamp  down  the  material 
simultaneously  and  controlled  remotely  by  an  air 
cylinder. Once the detonator is placed the volume 
of the cylinder is measured using a predetermined 
marked  scale  on  the  Teflon  tamperdetonator 
holder which is used to calculate the density of the 
mixture.  The  full  sequence  of  preparation  and 
firing operations are summarized by a photo-series 
Fig. 2. Remote rate stick operations a Mixing in 
LabRam b LEXI drives to the LabRam c LEXI 
retrieves  mixing  cylinder  d  LEXI  transitions  to 
shot  stand  position  e  LEXI  places  mixing 
cylinder  in  outer  cylinder  on  shot  stand  f  LEXI 
exits  the  tank  g  DetonatorTamper  placed  in 
cylinder h  i explosion. 
150000 frames per second one inch thick steel 
witness  plates  and  six  shorting  pins  used  to 
measure  the  detonation  velocities  of  the  material. 
The pins were positioned at 1.9 5.1 8.3 11.4 and 
14.6 0.75 2.0 3.25 4.5 and 5.75 inches from the 
bottom of the 30.48 cm 12 inch cylinder.  
Kinetic Plate Experiment Design 
Much  work  has  been  done  in  measuring  the 
equations  of  state  EOS  of  various  types  of 
explosives but it remains unclear whether the EOS 
contains  sufficient  information  to  predict  the 
performance of all types of explosive material or 
the  blast  delivered  by  non-ideal 
explosives  may  couple  more  efficiently  with 
structures of concern. In an attempt to understand 
the  differences  in  blast  effects  between  different 
explosive  charges  the  kinetic  plate  test  was 
developed.2    Similar  to  a  ballistic  pendulum3  the 
test  allows  for  an  integrated  measurement  of 
detonation  energy  and  early  blast  performance  to 
momentum  transfer.  The  experiment  uses  laser 
velocimetry  to  measure  the  momentum  delivered 
to test structures.  
The basic test setup is shown in Figure 3. The 
technique used a 12.7 cm 5 inch square 1.3 cm 
thick  steel  plate  weighing  1.6 
kilograms  and  a  0.95  cm  38  inch  thick  steel 
collar to prevent blast waves from passing around 
the  plate  within  the  experimental  time  scale.  The 
plate  and  collar  were  placed  15.2  cm  6  inches 
from  the  center  of  the  explosive  charge.  Test 
geometry  was  chosen  to  present  a  surface  facing 
the  explosive  charge  that  was  within  the  fireball 
generated  by  detonation  of  the  charge  as  this  is 
appropriate  for  many  relevant  applications.  The 
plate  thickness  and  mass  result  in  velocities  fast 
available instrumentation but slow enough that the 
plate distortion would not change significantly on 
experimental time scales. 
to  be  measured  accurately  with 
Fig. 3.   Kinetic plate experimental setup.  
The square plate was loosely taped inside the 
outer collar and the tolerances were such that the 
gap  between  plates  was  as  small  as  possible 
without  inhibiting  plate  motion.  The  strip  of  tape 
stabilized  the  hardware  prior  to  detonation  but 
was  unlikely  to  impose  significant  resistance  to 
inter-plate  motion  normal  to  the  plate  surface. 
There  was  likewise  no  significant  resistance  to 
collar  rotation  relative  to  its  base.  High-speed 
video  demonstrated  that  the  plate  velocities  were 
slightly faster than those of the collar as intended. 
The  primary  diagnostic  employed  during  the 
test  series  was  Photonic  Doppler  Velocimetry 
PDV  a  laser  interferometric  technique  that 
utilized 1550 nm infrared laser light to measure the 
plate  velocity  during  the  first  300-400  s  of 
motion. Four PDV probes three to uniquely define 
the  movement  of  the  plate  and  one  redundant 
probe  were  mounted  in  an  aluminum  plate  in  a 
square  array.  The  laser  probes  were  mounted 
opposite the explosive charge at a distance of 10.2 
to  15.2  cm  4  to  6  inches  from  the  plate  and 
aligned perpendicular to the plate surface using a 
mirror prior to detonation.   
The  KCfuel  explosive  charges  were  formed 
using  a  hemispherical  mold.  The  booster  was 
placed  in  the  center  of  the  charge  and  the  RP-1 
detonator was positioned parallel to the plate. The 
setup was lined in tape to hold it together and keep 
the spherical shape.  
Aluminum  was  added  to  the  mixtures  while 
maintaining the stoichiometric ratio of KC to fuel 
i.e.  making  them  fuel-rich  explosives  as  defined 
for  the  rate  stick  experiments.  To  determine  the 
effect  of  aluminum  addition  in  limited  quantities 
we compared both to mixtures without aluminum 
and  to  mixtures  with  an  inert  surrogate  lithium 
fluoride LiF. LiF was chosen because it has very 
similar  density  and  shock  impedance  and  is  not 
expected to participate in the detonation and postdetonation  expansion.  The  charge  mass  was  held 
constant for all tests. 
Barometric Calorimeter Experiment Design 
After detonation many explosives will release 
additional  energy  as  the  detonation  products  mix 
and  thermo-chemically  react  with  the  ambient 
environment.  This  additional  afterburn  energy 
to  combustion  of  detonation 
products  with  ambient  oxygen.  While 
detonation energy release occurs on a time scale of 
microseconds the afterburn energy release occurs 
on a time scale of milliseconds with a time varying 
energy  release  rate  dependent  upon  the  local 
temperature  and  pressure.  Barometric  calorimeter 
experiments  have  been  executed  in  both  nitrogen 
characteristics of afterburn for KCfuel explosives 
with and without aluminum additive. These  tests 
which provide pressure time histories along  with 
theoretical  and  analytical  solutions  offer  an 
engineering  basis  for  differentiating  the  timeevolving  role  of  explosives  with  and  without 
Experiments  were  performed  in  a  506-liter 
barometric calorimeter rated for charges up to 147 
gram TNT equivalent. The 506-liter calorimeter is 
a  cylindrical  vessel  with  inner  diameter  86.4  cm 
34 inches and height of 86.4 cm. The circular lid 
has  17  available  ports  for  pressure  gauges  and 
other  diagnostics.  Figure  4  shows  the  lid  of  the 
large  calorimeter  being  lowered  onto  the  base.  
Suspended  spherical  charges  were  employed  for 
all  KCfuelAl  mixtures.  The  test  configuration 
uses  a  spherical  PBX  N5  booster  that  has  been 
integrated  with  an  RP  3  detonator.  The 
detonatorbooster assembly is placed in the center 
of the spherical shell which is subsequently filled 
with test explosive and sealed. The charge volume 
was held constant for these tests. 
The principle of operation of the barometric 
calorimeter  has  been  previously  described  in 
detail  together  with  experimental  validation.45 
The  primary  advantage  of  barometric  calorimetry 
over traditional thermal calorimetric approaches is 
the ability of a barometric calorimeter to measure 
the rate at which energy is released by explosives. 
In  the  506-liter  barometric  calorimeter  pressure 
records  of  up  to  100  milliseconds  are  routinely 
The energy delivered to the structure by the 
first  pressure  wave  is  particularly  important  for 
predicting the mechanical response of metal plates. 
For  example  Nurick  and  Martin  examined  the 
mechanical  response  of  circular  and  rectangular 
plates  to  blast  pressures  and  found  that  the 
mechanical  response  and  failure  of  the  plates  is 
very  well-correlated  with  the  first  positive  phase 
impulse generated at the plate.6 The first positive 
phase impulse is the pressure integrated over time 
for the duration of the first positive pressure wave 
developed at the target.  
the  barometric  calorimeter 
energy released by the explosive is simultaneously 
obtained  with  the  time-dependent  energy  release 
structural  damage  as  late-time  combustion  can 
release sufficient energy to influence deformation 
and failure in larger more complex structures.4 
lean mixtures is inconsistent. The pins closer to the 
detonator  are  not  consistent  with  the  pins  further 
from  the  detonator.  Assuming  valid  pin  data  the 
velocity appears to transition to a slower rate and 
then  remain  relatively  consistent 
bottom of the cylinder thus indicating deflagration 
for  the  fuel-lean  and  stoichiometric  mixtures  in 
2.54  cm  1  inch  diameter  cylinders.  These  data 
suggest  that  the  specific  fuel-rich  mixture  of 
KCfuelaluminum  gives  the  best  performance  in 
terms of detonation velocity. 
Fig. 4. Lowering the lid onto the 506 L barometric 
Results and Discussion 
Rate Stick Test Results 
The aluminum level for the rate stick mixtures 
was held constant and the ratio of fuel to oxidizer 
was varied assuming complete combustion of the 
aluminum.  Detonation  velocities  were  calculated 
based on the slope of consistent shorting pin data 
shown  in  Figure  5.  Stoichiometric  and  fuel-lean 
mixtures  had  similar  slow  velocities  while  the 
fuel-rich mixture was much faster. Note that if the 
assumption  was  made  that  the  aluminum  is  inert 
then the ratio of KC to fuel in the fuel-rich mixture 
would  be  considered  stoichiometric  instead  of 
fuel-rich. Each test also contained a steel witness 
KCfuelaluminum  mixtures  showed  no  observed 
dent  in  the  witness  plate.  All  of  the  material 
reacted in each of the detonability tests.  
It  is  apparent  in  Figure  5  that  the  mixtures 
start  out  at  about  the  same  velocity  the  first  pin 
shorts  at  about  the  same  times  probably  due  to 
initially  being  overdriven  by  the  detonator.  The 
fuel-rich  mixture  continues  to  have  a  consistent 
propagation  velocity  indicating  a  detonation.  The 
shorting  pin  data  for  the  stoichiometric  and  fuel
the 
Fig. 5. KCfuelaluminum shorting pin data shows 
that  initial  pins  short  at  similar  times  but  later 
stoichiometric mixtures. 
High-speed video was recorded for each of the 
tests and still images from each mixture are shown 
in Figure 6. The figures stills are at approximately 
the  same  time  for  comparison  between  tests.  As 
with the pin data the images for the stoichiometric 
mixture  and  fuel-lean  mixture  are  very  similar. 
With  both  detonability  tests  the  reaction  front 
starts  out  uniform  but  as  it  propagates  down  the 
cylinder  non-uniform  propagation  or  streaking  of 
the reaction front is observed this is not observed 
in the fuel-rich test. Streaking in the fuel-lean mix 
is  not  as  evident  as  it  is  for  the  stoichiometric 
mixture due to the masking of the reaction front by 
the  cylinder  fixtures.  For  both  stoichiometric  and 
fuel-lean  mixtures  the  reaction  front  barely stays 
ahead  of  the  debris  cloud  an  indication  of  slow 
Conversely  the  still  images  from  the  highspeed video of the fuel-rich mixture at the bottom 
of  Figure  6  indicate  a  uniform  reaction  front 
propagating  faster  than  the  other  mixtures.  Here 
expansion of the cylinder is also apparent.  
KCfuelaluminum Fuel-lean 
KCfuelaluminum Stoichiometric 
KCfuelaluminum Fuel-rich 
Fig.  6.  High-speed  video  of  KCfuelaluminum 
reaction propagating down the cylinders for from 
top  to  bottom  fuel-lean  stoichiometric  and  fuel 
rich  mixtures.  Note  streaking  highlighted  in  final 
fuel-lean  and  stoichiometric 
The  detonation  velocities  measured 
KCfuelaluminum  formulations  in  the  rate  sticks 
can  be  compared  to  the  detonation  velocities 
calculated using the thermochemical code Cheetah 
6.0.7 The Cheetah velocities are calculated in two 
ways one assumes that all of the aluminum reacts 
and  is  converted  to  Al2O3  during  the  detonation 
the  other  assumes  that  the  aluminum  is  inert  and 
none reacts during the detonation. This is a useful 
way to analyze aluminum-containing conventional 
explosives  since  aluminum  may  react  slowly 
contributing  to  the  overall  blast  but  not  to  the 
explosives metal driving ability. 
Figure  7  shows  this  comparison  between 
experiment and Cheetah for the 1 inch rate sticks 
where the x-axis shows the oxygen balance and the 
is  held  constant.  Oxygen 
balance is the ratio of the oxygen available in the 
formulation  to  the  oxygen  needed  for  complete 
  The  experimental 
velocities  are  consistently 
calculated velocities. 
Fig. 7. KCfuelAl velocities compared to Cheetah 
predictions  for  formulations  containing  constant 
aluminum  content.  Rate  stick  data  are  closed 
points and Cheetah calculations are open points.   
The  trend  in  both  the  experimental  data  and 
Cheetah  6.0  calculations  is  that  the  detonation 
velocity decreases as one moves from the fuel-rich 
formulation  to  the  stoichiometric  formulation  to 
the  fuel-lean  formulation.  The  stoichiometric  and 
fuel-lean formulations may in fact be deflagrating 
instead of detonating. Once again the experimental 
values are lower than the Cheetah values which is 
likely  due  to  two  factors.  First  the  experimental 
velocities  are  not  obtained  at  infinite  radius. 
lower  measured  velocities  are 
probably  due  in  part  to  the  non-ideality  of  these 
mixtures which means that a portion of the energy 
is released after the passage of the detonation front 
and therefore does not contribute to the detonation 
velocity.  The  non-ideal  behavior  of  formulations 
interpretation of these data. 
The analysis is convoluted by finite diameter 
effects  and  if  most  or  all  of  the  differences 
between  the  calculated  and  measured  velocities 
can  be  accounted  for  on  this  basis  the  Cheetah 
values  calculated  assuming  reactive  aluminum 
may  be  just  as  accurate  or  more  accurate  than 
those calculated assuming inert aluminum. Part of 
the  reason  for  this  is  the  involvement  of  two 
different  aspects  of  aluminum  combustion
aluminum  combustion  1  adds  a  great  deal  of 
energy  to  the  product  gases  and  2  produces  a 
solid product  alumina. The production of a  solid 
product  may  be  the  reason  the  addition  of 
aluminum  does  not 
velocity  either  experimentally  or  by  calculation. 
Resolving  this  issue  would  require  performing 
additional tests at several rate stick diameters.  
Kinetic Plate and Barometric Calorimeter Results 
High-speed video frames of a KC kinetic plate 
experiment is shown in Figure 8. The PDV probe 
data  were  analyzed  using  a  Fourier  transform 
spectrogram and each resulting curve was fit to a 
purely  empirical  modified  exponential  function 
that  was  used  in  analysis  of  every  shot  for 
consistency. The asymptote of each fit was  taken 
as the maximum plate velocity for that probe. The 
probe  velocities  for  each  plate  were  combined 
rotational velocity components in order to obtain 
the  final  linear  velocity  for  each  experiment.  For 
each  test  uncertainties  in  the  plate  speed  are 
calculated from the standard deviation of the four 
probe  velocities  after  accounting  for  position  and 
plate  spin.  The  plate  speeds 
determined from the steady-state velocities of the 
plate which are generally reached at greater than 
230  s  after  detonation.  To  check  the  fitting 
procedure an average of the probe velocities was 
taken  after  they  reached  steady-state  values  and 
these  average  values  generally  gave  plate 
velocities within 0.5 ms of the linear velocity fits.  
Fig.  8.    Progression  of  a  non-aluminized  kinetic 
Table  1  summarizes  the  average  velocities 
measured from each experiment with different Al 
and  LiF  content.    Performance  increases  with 
higher  aluminum  content.    The  probe  velocities 
from  the  most  Al  rich  most  fuel  rich  and  most 
LiF rich least overall fuel content is illustrated in 
Figure  9  while  the  impulse  from  the  near-field 
pressure  gages  are  illustrated  in  Figure  10.  Both 
data clearly show higher plate velocities and peak 
pressures  for  the  Al  formulations  relative  to  the 
LiF formulations that increase with fuel richness.  
Table 1.  Average kinetic plate peak velocities  
The  barometric  calorimeter  examined  the 
same solid fuel investigated by the rate stick study 
described.    Multiple  pressure  probes  provided 
pressure  history  and  therefore  impulse  both  at 
early-time up to 3 ms and at late time.  
When comparing barometric calorimeter data 
for  the  KCfuels  with  and  without  aluminum 
additives do not show as clear a difference as the 
kinetic  plate  at  early  time.    Overall  early  time 
impulse  is  similar  with  and  without  aluminum 
though  shock  arrival  of  the  aluminized  materials 
precedes  the  mixtures  without  aluminum  Figure 
11.  At  late  times  however  the  quasi-static 
impulse  as  determined  by 
calorimeter not shown is significantly higher for 
the  aluminized  mixture  25  higher  for  this 
Fig.  9.    Sample  PDV  probe  velocities  for  top 
KCfuelaluminum  fuel  richest  and  bottom 
KCfuelLiF fuel leanest. 
Fig. 11.  Pressure time-history of first 3 ms for the 
3  aluminized  mixes  circled  green  turquoise 
magenta  lines  precede  the  4  non-aluminized 
shocks in the barometric calorimetry study overall 
early-time impulse is not significantly different.  
  Impulse  associated  with  near-field 
pressures  at  the  kinetic  plate  tests  for  KCfuelAl 
mixtures  fuel  richest  red  and  KCfuelLiF 
mixtures fuel leanest black.  
Table  2.  Relative  performance  of  KCfuel  mixtures  with  and  without  aluminum  using  different 
methodologies.    All  relative  values  are  approximate.    Note  that  the  fuel  used  for  the  rate-stick  and 
barometric experiments calorimeter was a granular fuel mixed with KC while that used for the kinetic 
plate experiment was a liquid fuel. 
Aluminized KC mixture 
Bar. Cal. early  Baseline 
Blast  effects  measurements  have  been  made 
using three experimental methodologies to address 
different  explosive 
reaction  zones.  Table  2 
summarizes  the  relative  performance  of  mixtures 
with  and  without  aluminum.    The  addition  of 
aluminum  to  otherwise  stoichiometric  chlorate 
mixtures resulting in fuel rich mixtures increased 
performance  in  some  tests  but  not  in  others.  For 
the rate stick tests limited study showed that fuel 
rich mixtures with aluminum additive have similar 
detonation  velocities  to  stochiometric  mixtures 
without  aluminum  these  fuel  rich  mixtures  with 
aluminum  show  greater  velocities 
aluminized  stoichiometric  and  fuel  lean  mixtures. 
As  the  ratio  of  aluminum  to  fuel  increases  the 
detonation  velocity  decreases.    These  trends  are 
consistent with Cheetah calculations.  The kinetic 
plate  tests  showed  higher  plate  velocities  for 
higher fuel and aluminum content when compared 
to a non-aluminized mixture containing an inert in 
calorimetry  showed  similar  enhancement  as 
observed in the kinetic plate tests but only at late 
time.  As  long  as  the  mixture  is  oxygen  balanced 
prior to adding the aluminum there do not appear 
to  be  any  disadvantages  in  terms  of  performance 
with  having  aluminum.  Those  mixtures  have 
equivalent  or  greater  performance  than  the  same 
mixtures without aluminum. 
Special thanks to Ron Chambers Raul Garza 
Steven Pease and Lisa Lauderbach for their work 
with  the  testing  at  the  LLNL  High  Explosives 
Application Facility HEAF.  We would also like 
the  assistance  of  Dr  Jon 
Maienschein  and  Dr  Jon  Schoonover  for  their 
review and leadership and Ms Byung-Hee Frantz 
and Mr Jason Tracy for their support of this study.  
This  work  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the 
U.S.  Department  of  Energy  by  Lawrence 
Livermore  National  Laboratory  under  Contract 
DE-AC52-07NA27344  and  Los  Alamos  National 
Laboratory  under  DE-AC52-06NA25396.    This 
paper  is  LLNL-PROC-655328  and  LA-UR-1424691.  The  experimental  data  collection  and 
analysis were performed under sponsorship of the 
U.S.  Department  of  Homeland  Security  Science 
and Technology Directorate. 
Evaluation of Thermal Sensing Materials in Closed Chamber Detonations 
A.L. Daniels D. Stamatis J.M. Lightstone C. Milby and F.R. Svingala 
Naval Surface Warfare Center Indian Head Explosive Ordnance Disposal Technology 
Division NSWC IHEODTD Indian Head MD 20640 
Abstract. Temporally and spatially resolved measurements of the temperature field inside an expanding 
post-detonation fireball are of interest to the energetic materials community.  Fireball opacity limits optical 
diagnostic  measurements  to  the  fireball  surface  while  the  destructive  high  temperatures  and  pressures 
produced render contact measurement methods unreliable.  Moreover contact methods typically lag in their 
response to the extremely fast dynamics in a detonation event.   A new approach to probe the interior of the 
fireball  is  to  seed  thermal  sensing  nano-  and  micron-sized  particles  into  the  explosive  event.      These 
materials undergo physical and chemical changes due to thermal exposure.  Analysis of recovered samples 
is used to find peak temperatures sensed by the particles.  An important characteristic of small particles like 
these  is  their  very  fast  response  to  changes  in  the  temperature  of  their  surroundings  as  compared  to 
thermocouples.    One  relevant  application  where  interior  fireball  temperatures  are  desired  is  in  the 
development of energetic materials for use against biological weapons.  The exposure history of a bacterial 
spore inside the fireball must be known in order to measure and model biocidal efficacy. The University of 
Minnesota  and  Oklahoma  State  University  have  provided  thermal  sensing  particle  samples  to  NSWC 
IHEODTD  for  testing.    This  paper  presents  the  evolution  of  an  experimental  technique  used  to  test  the 
ability  of  nano-  and  micron-sized  thermal  sensor  materials  to  measure  temperature  inside  an  expanding 
blast wave.  Additionally experimental measurements using pressure gauges thermocouples and optical 
diagnostics are shown and discussed along with modeling results using CTH.   
temperatures within the fireball of a detonation is 
of great  interest  for  the  energetic  community  and 
extremely challenging.  There are several methods 
that are currently used to measure the temperature 
such  as  pyrometry  fast 
emission  spectroscopy. 
techniques  all  suffer  from  drawbacks.    Optical 
such  as  pyrometry  and  emission 
spectroscopy are limited to surface measurements 
due  to  the  optical  density  of  the  fireball  and 
cannot  track  the  temperature  experienced  by  a 
Thermocouples have a large thermal mass which 
temperature  and  are  often  destroyed  by  the  blast 
before sufficient data have been collected. A new 
approach taken to probe the interior of the fireball 
is to seed thermal sensing nano- and micron-sized 
particles into the explosive event.   These materials 
to  systematic  errors 
undergo  physical  and  chemical  changes  due  to 
thermal  exposure.    An  ideal  thermometer  for 
biological  agent  defeat  applications  would  be  a 
similar size to the organism that is exposed to the 
detonation  event  and  would  flow  through  the 
detonation event in a similar manner. Dr. Eduardo 
Yukihara from Oklahoma State University OSU 
and  Dr.  Joey  Talghader  from  the  University  of 
Minnesota UMN funded by grant HDTRA1-101-0007  have  researched  temperature-sensing 
powders  and  sent  NSWC  IHEODTD  samples  for 
testing in a detonation environment.1-3 
Experimental Methods 
Previous  detonation  testing  on  thermal 
sensing particles was completed at the Sigmund J. 
Jacobs  Detonation  Science  Facility  located  at  the 
NSWC  IHEODTD  in  Indian  Head  MD.4-7  Initial 
studies utilized an open space configuration in a 20 
ft  x  20  ft  x  16  ft  detonation  chamber  depicted  in 
Figure  1.7  Approximately  1  g  of  sample  material 
was  held  in  a  paper  bag  and  placed  roughly  8.5 
inches  away  from  the  explosive  charge.    A 
thermocouple  placed  about  8.5  inches  away  from 
the  charge  was  used  to  record  the  temperature of 
the detonation products.  Six collection bins were 
placed  in  the  detonation  chamber  to  collect  the 
microparticles. The fireball size was too small and 
did  not  engulf  the  particles.    Most  of  the  sample 
was found to fall straight down.  As a result the 
sample was not effectively exposed to the fireball.  
experimental  design  discussed  in  the  following 
issues  were  addressed 
Figure  2  illustrates  the  top  view  of  the 
current  experimental  test  chamber  with  locations 
for  the  charge  C  thermal  sensor  sample  S 
thermocouples  pressure  gauges  and  optical 
diagnostics.    Experiments  were  carried  out  in  a 
243-liter cylindrical closed steel chamber with an 
inner  diameter  of  23  inches.      Two  different 
explosive charges were used to produce high and 
low  temperature  fireballs.    These  charges  are 
labeled  as  HPBX  and  LPBX  respectively 
throughout  this  report.  Initial  explosive  quantities 
were chosen based on CHEETAH 6.0 calculations 
for a constant volume detonation condition for the 
experimental volume.8 The charge was positioned 
in the center of the chamber.  It was centered with 
respect  to  both  the  cylindrical  axis  and  the 
diameter  of  the  chamber. 
positioned on the cylindrical axis 6 inches from the 
charge.  Three  Omega  Type  R  P13R-005 
thermocouples labeled channels 1 2 and 3 TC1 
TC2 and TC3 were used to measure temperature 
for all tests at a 50kHz sampling rate.   Three-color 
optical pyrometry 700 nm 900 nm and 1000 nm 
was used to measure the surface temperature of the 
fireball  with  10  ns  time  resolution.    Temperature 
was found assuming gray-body emissivity and by 
fitting  to  Plancks  law.    Spectral  emission  was 
observed  from  550  to  1200  nm  with  9  ms  time 
resolution  by  an  Ocean  Optics  USB2000 
spectrometer.    Pressure  was  recorded  using  two 
Kulite  XTEL  500  psi  pressure 
sampling at 1 MHz.   
Figure 1. Test arrangement used in previous work. 
Due  to  poor  dispersal  of  the  thermal  sensitive 
particles the arrangement shown in Figure 2 was 
used in this work.  
Figure  2.  Setup  for  closed  chamber  test.  C 
represents the high explosive HE charge S the 
location  of  the  thermal  sensor  sample  TC  the 
location of thermocouples and P the location of 
The post blast residue which included the 
thermal sensing particles and detonation products 
trapped  at  energy 
was  collected  after  each  test  and  returned  to  the 
universities  for  post  mortem  analysis. 
universities  sieved  out  the  particles  to  separate 
them  from  the  debris  and  then  the  post  mortem 
analysis consisted of two steps.  The first step was 
to obtain data from a control sample to determine a 
model  for  each  sample.1    This  model  was  then 
used  to  create  heating  profiles  for  each  TL 
  The  exposed  TL  materials  were 
compared to the heating profiles to determine what 
temperature they were exposed to.19  
and  UMN  provided  NSWC 
IHEODTD  with  thermal  sensing  particles  that 
exhibit  thermoluminescence  TL.    TL  occurs  in 
these  materials  after  exposure 
radiation  which  creates  free  electrons  and  holes 
introduced  by  defects  within 
bandgap.1  If  an  irradiated  sample  is  exposed  to  a 
thermal  event  the  trapped  charge  concentration 
changes due to increased mobility of electrons and 
holes at higher temperatures.  The change can be 
observed  by  reading  out  the  TL  vs.  temperature 
curve  post-exposure  and  comparing  to  a  control 
and  UMN  provided  NSWC 
IHOEDTD with LiF a commercially available TL 
material  Li2B4O7CuAg  LBO  MgB4O7DyLi 
MBO  and  CaSO4CeTb  CSO.     Funded  by  a 
DTRA  basic-research  grant  the  universities  did 
many  small-scale  tests  to  characterize  the  TL 
materials  before  they  were  tested  in  a  detonation 
environment.  Doull et al. found that the LiF was 
the least sensitive TL material studied at this point 
and the CSO material was most sensitive.2 Table 1 
summarizes  some  characteristics  of 
materials used in this test series.  Each TL material 
used in this test series will respond to temperatures 
in  a  range  up  to  a  maximum  temperature.2  Each 
TL  material  can  also  be  characterized  by  certain 
emission  wavelengths  depending  on  what 
chemicals  they  are doped with.   The  LiF  thermal 
sensing  particles  are  commercially  available  and 
cover  the  lower  temperature  ranges.    LBO  is 
another  thermal  sensing  material  that  is  used  for 
lower  temperature  ranges.    MBO  and  CSO  are 
used  to  detect  the  higher  temperature  ranges.    A 
mixture of CSO and LiF was provided to NSWC 
IHEODTD  to  see  if  both  the  low  and  high 
temperature  ranges  that  we  were  interested  in 
could  be  detected.      Yukihara  et  al.  studied  TL 
materials  heated  two  different  ways  for  a  long 
slow heating period 2 hours inside a furnace and 
by  fast  heating  1s.    Both  of  these  laboratory 
methods  matched  thermocouple  readings  except 
when  particle  aggregation  was  seen.6  When  the  
TL  materials  were  heated  more  rapidly  the 
temperatures recorded were roughly 100C higher 
than  when  they  were  heated  over  a  longer  time 
Table  1.  TL  peak  temperatures  and  emission 
measurements shown in Figures 3 and 4 are for the 
LPBX  and  HPBX  explosive  charges  averaged 
from  all  corresponding  tests.    The  material  type 
and size of these charges were determined from a 
series  of  tests  performed  without  thermal  sensor 
temperatures observed  in  the  LPBX  tests  were  in 
the  range  of  370-450  K  while  the  HPBX  tests 
reached 500-650 K.  A single test was performed 
Thermocouple  temperatures  in  the  range  of  320360K  were  observed. 
thermocouple  temperature  data  from  this  13 
LPBX test S-LPBX.   
It  is  important  to  note  that  the  response 
time of the thermocouples to temperature changes 
is  much  slower  than  the  duration  of  the  event 
temperature measurements. Turbulent behavior of 
the hot gas flow in the chamber will influence the 
response time of the thermocouple.  This turbulent 
behavior can vary stochastically from test  to test.  
Standard deviations of 40-80 K were observed for 
the LPBX tests and 70-140 K for the HPBX tests 
at their peak temperatures. 
Figure  3.  Average  Temperatures  for  the  LPBX 
Figure  4.  Average  Temperatures  for  the  HPBX 
Figure  6  shows  an  example  of  a 
temperature measurement using 3-color pyrometry 
with emission intensity  measured at 700 nm 900 
nm  and  1000  nm.      These  three  intensities  were 
then  fit  to  a  black  body  emission  spectrum  to 
determine  the  temperature  at  the  contact  surface 
between  the  air  and  detonation  products.  These 
temperatures are expected to be much higher and 
of  shorter  duration  than  the  temperatures  reached 
by  the  bulk  surrounding  air  and  thermal  sensing 
Figure 5. Temperatures for the S-LPBX Test. 
The  collimating  lens  is  pointed  straight  at  the 
charge  and  collects  light  emitted  immediately  as 
the  detonation  event  is  initiated.    The  very  high 
temperatures recorded in the first 10 microseconds 
are most likely resulting from the detonation wave 
propagating  down  the  charge.        These  high 
temperatures  are  occurring  at  the  charge  and  are 
not  indicative  of  temperatures  sensed  at  the 
sample.    Also  note  that  the  early  time  detonation 
products may not be Planckian emitters especially 
if  composed  of  atomic  and  molecular 
resulting in erroneous temperatures.  As the early- 
temperature.    The  LPBX  temperature  drops  off 
quickly  as  the  detonation  products  expand  and 
cool.  The HPBX test heats more slowly and stays 
hot for longer due to afterburning as the products 
react with oxygen in the chamber air.    
Figure  6.  Representative  Examples  of  Pyrometry 
Temperatures for All Tests. 
is  observed  which 
Figure  7  shows  representative  emission 
spectra obtained  for  each  shot  type.    In  all  shots 
atomic Na 589 and 819 nm and K 766 and 769 
lines  are  present. 
contaminants  observed 
materials  where  even  trace  amounts  have  an 
intense  emission.    Also  an atomic  Li  line  at  670 
the  energetic  material.  There 
appear  to  be  several  other  atomic  and  molecular 
emissions present which have not been positively 
identified.  The molecular emissions may be due to 
intermediate  detonation  products.    In  addition  to 
the energetic materials sources for other emitting 
materials  include  the  detonator  charge  case  and 
the  thermosensor  samples  themselves.    A  list  of 
elements  present  in  significant  quantities  would 
include C H N O F Cl Li B Mg Ca and S.  
Elements present in smaller quantities also include 
Cu  Ag  Dy  Ce  and  Tb.    Thus  there  are  many 
potential  emitters  making  the  spectra  difficult  to 
Figure  7.  Representative  examples  of  spectra  for 
Table 2 illustrates the CHEETAH results 
for the LPBX and HPBX explosives compared to 
the average experimental quasi-static pressure and 
temperature  readings.    The  experimental  quasistatic pressures and temperatures were lower than 
the  idealized  values  calculated  by  CHEETAH  as 
Table  2.  Theoretical  Pressure  and  Temperature 
from  CHEETAH  vs  Experimental  Pressure  and 
Temperature Values. 
Table  3  shows  a  summary  of  peak 
temperatures  recorded  by  the  thermocouples  for 
material  compared  to  the  peak  temperatures  as 
thermal  sensing  particles 
analyzed  post  experiment  by  the  universities.  
Three  peak  temperatures  were  recorded  for  each 
test.    Thermocouples  1  and  2  were  located  equal 
distance from the charge and thermocouple 3 was 
the  furthest  away  from  the  charge.    Overall 
thermocouple  3  recorded  the  lowest  temperatures 
while  1  and  2  produced  similar  temperatures.  It 
may be noted that for the two LPBX shots for the 
unexpected  result  may  be  due  to  thermocouple 
malfunctioning  during 
expected  the  HPBX  tests  produced  the  highest 
temperatures  overall.    The  test  executed  with  13 
of  the  explosive  charge  experienced  very  low 
temperatures  compared  to  the  HPBX  and  LPBX 
tests respectively.  Post-mortem TL-analysis of the 
thermal  sensing  particles  showed  that  only  the 
CSO  and  LiF  materials  had  sufficient  dynamic 
range to measure temperatures for both LPBX and 
HPBX  charges.    The  HPBX  tests  were  found  to 
have exceeded the maximum temperature for LBO 
and  MBO  particles.  The  mixed  samples  CSO   
LiF  particles  were  able  to  measure  temperatures 
for  the  LPBX  and  HPBX  tests.    Overall  the 
thermal  sensing  materials  recorded  somewhat 
higher temperatures than the thermocouples which 
is  expected  due  to  their  lesser  response  time  and 
greater proximity to the charge.  
Table 3. Peak Temperatures of Thermocouples 1 
2  and  3  vs  Peak  Temperatures  from  the  thermal 
1            2          3 
The  experimental  apparatus  and  PBX 
charge  were  modeled  in  2-D  with  cylindrical 
symmetry  in  the  hydrocode  CTH  vs  10.2.10  The 
experiment  was  modeled  by  a  flat  mesh  with 
0.5mm  grid  spacing.  The  steel  chamber  was 
modeled with a built-in SESAME tabular equation 
of state with a Johnson-Cook strength model.  The 
HPBX and LPBX charges were modeled with the 
JWL  equation  of  state  using  built-in  CTH 
parameters  andor  parameters  obtained  from  the 
LLNL explosives reference guide as appropriate.11 
Temperature  pressure  and  local  flow 
corresponding  to  the  placement  of  thermocouples 
and pressure gauges in the experiment. In order to 
compare  the  temperatures  obtained  in  the  model 
necessary to post-process the model data to correct 
for the thermal mass of the thermocouple and local 
coefficient of heat transfer. This was accomplished 
by  combining  the  Nusselt  number  correlation  for 
spheres  described  by  Whitaker  and  a  simple 
lumped capacitance analysis.12-13 The Biot number 
was found to be quite small Bi0.03 in all cases 
indicating  the  validity  of  the  lumped  capacitance 
                                                 
a BMR  beyond material range 
those  obtained  experimentally 
assumption under these conditions. Full details of 
this  procedure  will  be  published  in  a  future 
increased  proximity  of 
Point-to-point  comparison  with  averaged 
peak  experimental  data  shows  good  agreement 
with both modeled thermocouple data and pressure 
data.  Both  the  LPBX  and  HPBX  models  reach 
peak  temperature  more  rapidly  than  observed  in 
experiments  Figure  8.  This  difference  is  likely 
thermocouples  to  the  wall  in  the  experiment 
which  leads  to  lower  local  gas  velocities  and  a 
reduced  convective  heat 
predicted  temperature  field  in  a  quadrant  of  the 
chamber shown in Figure 9 is qualitatively quite 
heterogeneous  displaying  many  isolated  pockets 
of high-temperature and vorticity across a nearlyambient background for the first 10 milliseconds. 
In  the  experiments  it  is  anticipated  that  this 
heterogeneity  would  be  somewhat  reduced  by 
turbulent  mixing  effects  which  are  not  explicitly 
modeled  by  CTH.  Nonetheless  this  suggests  a 
temperature  spread 
observed in both the measured peak thermocouple 
temperatures  and  the  temperatures  measured  by 
thermal  sensor  particles.  In  both  cases 
stochastic  variation  in  either  the  path  traveled  by 
the  particle  or  the  position  and  movement  of  the 
pockets  of  heated  air  can  lead  to  variation  in 
measured temperatures. 
Figure 8. Comparison of model and experimental 
temperatures at location TC2. 
Based on these test results we learned the 
pressure  gauges  recorded  quasi-static  pressure 
readings of 25 psig for the LPBX tests and 35 
psig  for  the  HPBX  tests.    The  experimental 
temperature and pressure readings were lower than 
CHEETAH  calculations  predicted.    As  expected 
sensitive  particles  were  higher 
temperatures recorded by the thermocouples due to 
the  faster  response  time  and  closer  proximity  of 
the thermally sensitive particles to the blast event. 
The  university  results  indicate  that  the  testing 
completed  at  IHEODTD  was  reproducible  for 
materials tested under the same conditions.  CTH 
modelling  showed  agreement 
temperature and pressure readings.   
1 The new experimental setup the thermal sensing 
particles  better  are  better  exposed  to  the  blast 
fireball than the old experimental setup.   
2 TL particles are robust enough to survive a blast 
3  A  range  of  temperatures  may  be  studied  by 
utilizing different thermal sensing particles. 
4  The  thermal  sensing  particles  are  faster  than 
conventional  methods  thermocouples  but  still 
only  give  a  temporally  and  spatially  averaged 
5  CTH  calculations  matched  the  experimental 
The  authors  of  this  paper  would  like  to 
thank  Suhithi  Peiris  from  the  Defense  Threat 
Reduction  Agency  DTRA  for  the  financial 
support of this program.  They would also like to 
thank  Mr.  John  OConnor  Mr.  Tyrone  Pickeral 
and  Mr.  Robert  Hay  for  testing  support.    Finally 
the  authors  would  like  to  thank  Dr.  Eduardo 
Yukihara from Oklahoma State University and Dr. 
Joey Talghader from the University of Minnesota 
for  providing  the  thermal  sensing  particles  to 
NSWC  IHEODTD  for  testing  for  many  fruitful 
discussions  and  for  performing 
analysis of the thermosensor particles.  
Figure  9.  Temperature  fields  produced  in  the 
HPBX model showing initial heterogeneity of the 
post-detonation  temperature  field.  Lighter  gray 
indicates  higher  temperature  with  white  equal  to 
3500 K and black equal to 300 K. 
The  objective  of  this  project  was  to  evaluate 
the  utility  of  TL  particles  in  measuring  the 
temperature  of  a  blast  event. 
accomplished  by  exposing 
particles made by OSU and UMN to a blast event 
collect  the  samples  and  compare  temperatures 
measured by thermocouple and predicted by CTH 
model  to  those  measured  by  the  thermal  sensing 
particles.  IHEODTD created a new experimental 
setup  to  help  improve  thermal  exposure  and 
collection efficiency and obtain more reproducible 
  The  temperature  and  pressure  were 
test  completed  utilizing 
thermocouples  3-color  pyrometry 
Thermocouples  1  and  2  produced  comparable 
temperature  readings  while  thermocouple  3  read 
slightly lower than the other thermocouples due to 
its  location  relative  to  the  detonation  event.    The 
lower  temperatures  recorded  by  thermocouple  3 
were also seen in the CTH models that were run. 
Representative  pyrometry  plots  show  that  the 
HPBX samples produced higher temperatures than 
the  LPBX  tests.    Emission  spectroscopy  showed 
typical contaminants such as Na and K present in 
the  materials  as  well  as  many  other  atomic  and 
molecular  emissions. 
spectrum  was  difficult  due  to  the  complexity  and 
large  number  of  potential  emitters  present.  The 
  Deconvolution  of 
Static High-Pressure Measurements and Detonation Characteristics of 
R-salt a Cyclic Nitrosamine 
Virginia W. Manner Patrick R. Bowden Bryce C. Tappan Dana M. Dattelbaum Jacqueline M. Veauthier 
Raja S. Chellappa Ernest L. Hartline Stephen A. Sheffield 
Los Alamos National Laboratory 
Los Alamos NM 87544 USA 
Abstract.  Cyclotrimethylenetrinitrosamine  R-salt  is  a  fairly  insensitive  explosive  that 
can  be  easily  prepared  from  hexamine  sodium  nitrite  and  hydrochloric  acid.    This 
nitrosamine is of interest because of its similarity in structure to the reduced form of the 
nitramine RDX and its melt-castable nature.  In this paper we characterize and examine 
the behavior of R-salt in static high-pressure conditions front surface impact experiments 
and detonation velocity measurements. 
Cyclotrimethylenetrinitrosamine 
Figure 1 is a fairly insensitive explosive that can 
be easily prepared from hexamine sodium nitrite 
and  hydrochloric  acid.    This  nitrosamine  is  of 
interest because of its similarity in structure to the 
additionally  interesting  due  to  its  melt-castable 
nature  melt  at  97  C.  R-salt  has  an  impact 
sensitivity of 242 cm compared with 12.3 cm for 
PETN and is completely insensitive to friction on 
our apparatus Table 1. 
the  nitramine  RDX.  It 
R-salt  characterization  as  an  explosive  is 
lacking  in  many  areas.    We  have  prepared  and 
characterized  R-salt  for  the  first  time  using 
diamond anvil cells DAC at a range of pressures 
up  to  13.0  GPa  with  interrogation  by  Terahertz 
  Additionally  a  phase 
transition  was  observed  via  FIR.    We  have  also 
performed  front  surface  impact  measurements  to 
gain Hugoniot information and determined steady 
state  CJ  detonation  velocity  and  estimated 
pressure  using  rate  stick  measurements.  Static 
high-pressure data and detonation behavior will be 
discussed  in  comparison  to  the  fully  oxidized 
analog  RDX1  as  well  as  other 
Figure  1.    The  structure  of  R-salt  is  similar  to 
RDX with three nitroso- groups in place of three 
Table 1. Sensitivity properties of R-salt.a 
a  Both  R-salt  and  PETN  have  a  spark  sensitivity 
threshold of initiation at 0.0625 J although R-salt 
is unlikely to undergo a propagating ignition at this 
energy  level  RDX  has  a  slightly  higher  spark 
sensitivity at 0.099 J.  b R-salt has a clean melt at 
Caution-  while  R-salt 
material care should be taken in its synthesis and 
handling  and  should  only  be  attempted  by  those 
experienced  in  the  safe  handling  of  explosive 
materials.  Furthermore  like  all  nitrosamines  Rsalt  is  a  suspected  carcinogen  and  is  likely  toxic. 
Proper PPE and ventilation should always be used 
R-salt  was  prepared  using 
procedure.  Hydrochloric acid HCl 30 500g 
was poured over 1000 g of ice.  Hexamine 140 g 
was dissolved in 500 g of water and added to the 
  Sodium  nitrite  208  g  was 
dissolved  in  500  g  water  and  added  to  the 
hexamineHCl  solution  dropwise  with  constant 
stirring.  The temperature was monitored and kept 
below 10 C by adding ice to the reaction solution.  
The foamy yellow precipitate that formed over the 
top of the solution was scooped out frequently and 
collected on a filter.  After all sodium nitrite was 
added  the  mixture  was  allowed  to  stand  for  20 
minutes  then  filtered  along  with  the  previously 
collected precipitate neutralized with a weak base 
and  washed  with  water.  R-salt  60  g  was 
collected as a low-density yellow powder.  
Pellets  were  pressed  of  the  R-salt  powder  at 
99    100  theoretical  maximum  density  TMD 
However these pellets were found to expand over 
time  eventually  reaching    80  TMD.    The 
uneven  expansion  of  the  pellets  made  them  less 
useful  for  front  surface  impact  and  detonation 
velocity  measurements. 
  Pellets  prepared  at 
densities  of  75    80  TMD  were  more  uniform 
and showed almost no expansion over time. 
resonance spectrum for R-salt is shown in Figure 
2.    As  discussed  previously4  the  molecule  forms 
two isomers in solution.  One isomer has the NO 
groups oriented in a propeller shape resulting in 
a single chemical shift.  The other isomer lacks a 
threefold axis and has three unique chemical shifts 
resulting in the four total peaks shown in Figure 2. 
Figure  2.    Nuclear  magnetic  resonance  NMR 
Integrations are shown below peaks and shifts in 
ppm are above each peak. 
For  the  static  high-pressure  experiments  Rsalt  powder  was  gently  crushed  and  loaded  in 
symmetric  diamond  anvil  cells  DAC  with  type 
IIa  diamonds  ranging  from  300  to  800  m 
diameter culets.  Stainless steel or rhenium gaskets 
were  used  with  sample  chamber  dimensions  of 
100-500  m  diameter  by  30-200  m  thickness.  
The  larger  dimension  anvils  800  m  culet  and 
gaskets  500  m  dia.  by  200  m  thickness  were 
spectroscopy due to low absorbance.   
In  situ  pressure  measurements  were  made  by 
either placing ruby spheres or gold powder into the 
sample  chamber.    For  vibrational  spectroscopy 
measurements  ruby  fluorescence  was  monitored 
by  the  R1  line  shift  according  to  PGPa   
AB1T0TB  1 where A  1904 GPa 
B  7.665 0T694.28 nm at 298 K and T is 
the  change  in  wavelength  of  R1  line  for  a  given 
pressure  from  the  value  at  atmospheric  pressure.5  
For  X-ray  diffraction  measurements  the  P-V-T 
equation of state for gold reported by Fei et al. was 
used to determine pressure in the cell.6  
the  U2a  beamline  of 
Infrared  spectroscopic  measurements  were 
VacuumUltraviolet  VUV  storage  ring  at  the 
National Synchrotron Light Source at Brookhaven 
National  Laboratory.    The  optical  layout  of  the 
beamline  facility  has  been  described  in  detail 
spectrometer  and  a  custom  made  vacuum  IR 
microscope  with  a  helium-cooled  bolometer  were 
used.  The intense synchrotron source was used for 
both far-infrared FIR and THz measurements a 
Mylar  beamsplitter  either  6  m  THz  or  3.5  m 
FIR  thick  was  used.    As  stated  above  THz 
measurements  required  relatively  large  samples 
sizes  whereas  FIR  measurements  necessitated  a 
much smaller sample size 100 m diameter by 60 
m thickness to avoid total absorbance of internal 
modes.  The software package GRAMSAI version 
9.1  Thermo-Scientific  was  used 
For  X-ray  diffraction  measurements  R-salt 
into  a  DAC  under  hydrostatic 
conditions  using  helium.    Measurements  were 
made in at the Sector 16-ID-B HPCAT beam line 
at the Advanced Photon Source Argonne National 
Laboratory as described previously8 an excitation 
wavelength  of  0.61992    corresponding  to  an 
energy  of  20  keV  was  used.    The  unit  cell 
parameters  at  each  pressure 
obtained  by  Le  Bail  refinement9  using 
EXPGUI  graphical  interface10  version  of  General 
Structure  Analysis  System  GSAS.11    Previously 
measurements  reported  by  Hinch  indicated  a 
monoclinic  structure  and  implied  that  the  a  axis 
was  the  unique  axis  but  did  not  indicate  a  space 
group.3    From  the  observed  reflections  at  the 
lowest  pressure  0.7  GPa  the  space  group  P21a 
was used to fit the patterns.  The room-temperature 
isothermal P-V data was fit using a 3rd order BirchMurnaghan formalism12 resulting in determination 
isothermal  bulk  modulus 
zero-pressure unit cell volume 
  first  pressure  derivative  
Plate impact experiments on neat pressed Rsalt  pellets  were  performed  using  a  large  bore 
two-stage gas gun with a 50 mm-diameter launch 
tube  and  maximum  velocity  of  3.6  kms.    The 
experiments  were  front  surface  impact  FSI  or 
reverse  ballistic  geometry  in  which  R-salt 
samples  were  mounted  in  the  front  of  Lexan 
polycarbonate  projectiles  and 
oriented single crystal 100 LiF lithium fluoride 
windows.      An  8  k  Al  mirror  was  vapordeposited  onto  the  impact  surface  of  the  LiF 
which  was  further  protected  with  a  5-7  m-thick 
Kapton  film.    The  interface  particle  velocity  was 
measured  using  dual  velocity-per-fringe  vpf 
VISARs Velocity Interferometry System for Any 
Inc.  Albuquerque  NM.  
Projectile  velocity  was  determined  by  the  optical 
interruption of 4 laser diodes spaced nominally 12 
mm  apart  at  the  exit  interface  of  the  gas  gun 
launch  tube.   The error in  projectile velocity is  
0.1.    Estimated  error  in  the  measured  interface 
particle velocity is  2.  States on the principal 
matching  to  LiF  using  the  measured  projectile 
velocity  interface  particle  velocity  and  initial 
sample  density  using 
matching techniques. 
Detonation  velocities  and  pressures  were 
measured  via  the  rate-stickplate  dent  method 
with  both  pressed  and  melt-casted  R-salt. 
Detonation  front  time  of  arrival  was  determined 
via piezoelectric pins Dynasen Inc. in the case of 
the  melt-cast  material  and  closure  foils  between 
the  pellets  in  the  pressed  material.  Estimated 
detonation  pressures  were  determined  via  plate 
dent depth of steel witness plates. 
Results and Discussion 
Static High Pressure Measurements 
THz measurements were performed on R-salt 
up to 7.0 GPa however weak intensity and band 
broadening  precluded  using  data  above  2.2  GPa.  
FIR measurements were performed up to 12 GPa.  
THz and IR absorbance vs frequency are shown in 
Figure  3.    Table  2  shows  the  initial  position  of 
each mode and the pressure-driven frequency shift 
rate.    The  two  THz  modes  starting  at  50  and  77 
cm-1  are  due  to  lattice  modes  analogous  to 
literature RDX assignments.13 The assignments for 
the R-salt FIR peaks are shown in Table 2 and are 
also based on literature assignments for RDX.14   
Table 2. R-salt THz and IR peak shifts with 
Initial Peak Position 
a  Based  on  literature  assignments  for  RDX  ref 
Fig.  3.    a  THz  data  at  varying  pressures  for  Rsalt.  b Far-IR spectra at varying pressures. 
Fig. 4.  Changes in energy vs pressure for Far-IR 
indicating  potential 
compression  along  axes 
crystal-oriented shock sensitivities similar to other 
known explosives such as PETN. 
Fig.  5.  Room  Temperature  P-V  isotherm  with  3rd 
Order Birch-Murnaghan. 
Fig.  6.  R-Salt  unit  cell  lattice  parameters  as  a 
function of pressure. 
Front Surface Impact Measurements 
performed  to  determine  states  on  the  principal 
Hugoniot locus of neat pressed R-salt.  However 
Figure  4  shows  that  a  possible  phase  change 
occurs  in  R-salt  under  static  high-pressure  at  7 
GPa.  In RDX a major phase transition occurs at 
4  GPa  for  the        polymorph.    The  most 
sensitive  internal  vibrations  in  RDX  with  respect 
to  pressure  are  ranked  as  CH  stretching    NN 
stretching    NC  stretching    NO2  torsions.15    It 
has been proposed that the main effect of pressure 
on RDX  4 GPa is modification of bonding in the 
s-triazine  ring  including  the  NN  bonds  as  well 
as  changes  in  NO2  group  torsion.15  For  R-salt 
most  of  the  major  internal  vibrations  affected  by 
the  phase  change  at  7  GPa  are  due  to  ring 
torsions  such  as  bending  and  twisting  which  is 
unsurprisingly similar to RDX. 
Pressure-Volume Isotherm 
    716.97    5.89  3. 
Polycrystalline R-salt was hydrostatically He 
medium  compressed  from  0.7  GPa  to  13.0  GPa.  
In this pressure regime R-salt was not observed to 
undergo  any  phase  transition  and  was  fit  using 
EXPGUIGSAS1011 to the P21a space group.  As 
shown  in  Fig.  5  the  3rd  order  Birch-Murnaghan 
    7.13    0.64  and 
calculated corresponds to a crystal density of 1.612 
  0.013  gcm3  the  unit  cell  volume  reported  by 
Hinch  corresponds  to  a  crystal  density  of  1.586 
indicating  a  1.6  difference  between  the  value 
reported herein and the previously reported value. 
Evaluation  of  the  lattice  parameters  as  a 
function  of  compression  revealed  that  both  the  a 
and b axes maintained their aspect ratio throughout 
compression  Fig.  6.    The  c  axis  appeared  least 
compressible  and  thus  the  aspect  ratio  of  b  to  c 
increased  with  increasing  pressure.    The  ambient 
reported previously were a  b  c  2.05  1  1.45 
at 13.0 GPa the ratios were found to be 2.05  1  
1.57.6  Additionally the angle decreased between 
the ambient conditions value of 92.35 to 91.22 at 
the  first  pressure  point  0.7  GPa  the  angle  then 
varied randomly between 90.48 and 91.84.   
temperature  and  pressure 
At  13.0  GPa  a  30  volume  collapse  was 
observed accompanied by a 13 reduction in both 
a  and  b  axes  and  a  7  reduction  in  the  c  axis.  
Fig. 7. Particle velocity wave profile measured at the R-saltLiF interface in shot 2s-796 a front surface 
impact experiment in which an R-salt pellet was impacted into oriented 100 LiF at 1.678  0.004 kms.  
The unreacted Hugoniot state was determined from the initial plateau in the interface particle velocity the 
measured projectile velocity and impedance matching to LiF.  After an induction time the R-salt reacts 
which is evidenced by an increase in particle velocity at the interface.  Sample heterogeneity and loss of 
light return at the LiF window contributed to the noise in the profile at later time. 
Table  3. Summary of the results from gas gun-driven plate impact experiments on R-salt samples.  The 
interface  particle  velocity  uint  and  projectile  velocity  upr  were  measured  in  the  experiments.    The 
Hugoniot  states  were  then  determined  by  impedance  matching  and  application  of  the  conservation 
equations.  The table also provides estimates of reaction induction time and reaction rates for the R-salt 
samples at the shock input condition. 
experienced  difficulties 
integrity  in  the  pressed  high  density  samples.  
Over time  1 week the samples were observed 
to  relax  and  result  in  cracking  bowing  and 
expansion of the parts.   
Shocked  states  in  the  R-salt  samples  were 
determined by impedance matching to the known 
LiF Hugoniot 0  2.638 gcm3 c0  5.15 mms 
s    1.35  using  the  measured  projectile  velocity 
upr  and  the  interface  particle  velocity  uint  from 
the  VISAR  measurements.      Substitution  into  the 
Rankine-Hugoniot  relation  for  conservation  of 
momentum gives the relations 
Based  on  the  LiF  Hugoniot  parameters  and 
uint  an  expression  is  obtained  for  pressure  at  the 
interface which must be the same in both LiF and 
The in-material particle velocity in the R-salt 
is  the  difference  in  those  measured  for  the 
projectile and at the interface 
Shock  velocity  in  the  R-salt  was  then  calculated 
using  a  second  application  of  Eq.  5  and  the 
measured initial sample density  
The measured interface particle velocity wave 
profile from shot 2s-796 is shown in Figure 7.  The 
initial  impact  results  in  a  flat-top  shock  at  the 
interface.    There  is  noise  observed  in  the  profile 
due  to  transient  loss  of  return  light.    After  an 
induction  time  of    163  ns  the  particle  velocity 
increases  at  the  R-saltLiF  interface  which  is 
indicative  of  shock-driven  reaction  in  the  R-salt.  
The particle velocity then increases over 176 ns to 
a peak particle velocity of up  0.880 mms.  The 
rise in particle velocity is associated with chemical 
reaction rates in the R-salt sample and the peak up 
provides a measurement of fully-reacted states on 
the products locus.   
In shot 2s-796 the R-salt was  12 porous 
Composition-B  and  PBX  9501  under  shock 
loading.  Figure 7 shows the particle velocity wave 
profile measured at LiF in 2s-796 in which an Rsalt  pellet  0    1.357  gcm3  was  impacted  into 
oriented  100  LiF  at  1.678    0.004  kms.    The 
unreacted Hugoniot state was determined from the 
initial plateau in the interface particle velocity the 
measured  projectile  velocity  and 
matching to LiF.  At 7.9 GPa there is a substantial 
induction time of  150 ns before reaction occurs 
in the R-salt.   This finding is consistent with the 
drop  height  impact  testing  described  above  and 
indicates that R-salt is much less sensitive than the 
analogous explosive RDX.  This is believed to be 
due to a number of factors related to the physical 
and  chemical  properties  of  the  R-salt.  Most 
notably  the  nitroso  group  on  the  ring  leads  to  a 
lower  oxygen  balance  as  well  as  being  less 
electronegative  than  the  nitro  group.  One  of  the 
chemical factors implicated in the sensitivity of an 
explosive is a high charge density at the electronic 
surface of the molecule. Physical effects could be 
endothermic  melting  event  and  exothermic 
decomposition in R-salt relative to RDX. 
large  difference  between 
In the 2nd experiment 2s-786 there appeared 
to be poor integrity in the R-salt pellet due to the 
issues  described  above  in  maintaining  a  high 
density in the parts.  The interface particle velocity 
showed an initial decrease consistent with closure 
of porosity in the sample a brief plateau then an 
in  particle  velocity  consistent  with 
reaction.  The plateau in uint was used to determine 
the  Hugoniot  state.    It  is  suggested  that  R-salt 
formulated  with  a  binder  or  a  lower  density 
sample be studied in future investigations.  
The  unreacted  Hugoniot  states  and  reaction 
induction  times  measured  for  R-salt  samples  are 
summarized in Table 3.   
Detonation Velocity Measurements 
Detonation velocity was measured on pressed 
and  melt-cast  R-salt  to  determine  performance  of 
the  material  formed  under  different  conditions. 
Both methods resulted in unfavorably low-density 
cylinders.  The  melt-cast  material  suffered  from 
relatively  low  density  due  to  small-entrained  air 
bubbles and other larger voids.  The lower density 
of the pressed material was a function of pressing 
at  low-pressures  as  the  pellets  fracture  when  the 
material is pressed cold at high-pressures.  
A 12.7 mm diameter rate-stick of R-Salt was 
melt-casted  at  an  average  density  of  1.22  gcm3 
77  TMD  100  TMD    1.586  gcm3  as 
determined  by  the  X-ray  crystal  structure  of  RSalt3 into a polyvinylchloride tube Figure 8a. An 
analogous  12.7  mm  diameter  rate-stick  of  R-Salt 
pellets was prepared from 23 coarse crystals of RSalt  and  13  fine  powder  of  R-Salt  pressed  to  a 
density  of  1.34  gcm3  84  TMD.    A  complete 
detonation  occurred  in  both  cases  and  detonation 
velocities and estimated detonation pressures were 
determined. Time of arrival of the detonation front 
was  determined  via  the  piezoelectric  pins  in  the 
case  of  the  melt-cast  material  Figure  8a  and 
closure  foils  between  the  pellets  in  the  pressed 
material.  The  melt-cast  material  had  a  detonation 
velocity  Dv  of  6.999  kms  and  the  detonation 
pressure  PCJ  was  estimated  to  be  19.8  GPa  via 
plate  dent  on  a  steel  witness  plate.    A  detonation 
velocity  of  6.750  kms  was  determined  for  the 
pressed  R-Salt  Figure  8b  with  a  detonation 
pressure  of  21.8  GPa  estimated  from  the  plate 
dent.  The higher observed detonation velocity of 
the  low  density  melt-cast  material  could  possibly 
surrounded by relatively high density material. 
Figure 8.  Detonation velocity measurement of a 
melt-cast R-Salt at a density of 77 TMD with a 
corresponding  detonation  velocity  of  7.00  kms 
and  b  R-Salt  pressed  to  a  density  of  84  TMD 
with  a  corresponding  detonation  velocity  of  6.75 
cyclotrimethylenetrinitrosamine    R-salt  to  mechanical  and  shock 
impetus was determined in addition to its behavior 
static  high  pressure  and  detonation 
properties.  As  a  reduced  form  of  the  nitramine 
RDX  the  nitrosamine  R-salt  is  of  interest  for 
fundamental  studies  on  comparable  functional 
group  behavior.  At  the  relatively  low  density  of 
84  TMD  R-salt  exhibits  a  detonation  velocity 
and  pressure  of  90  of  RDX  at  a  comparable 
mechanical  stimuli.    Furthermore  it  was  found 
that  even  at  a  low  density  of  88  TMD  R-salt 
was found to be less sensitive than Composition-B 
and  PBX  9501  under  shock  loading.    The  large 
observed differences in R-salt performance versus 
sensitivity  make  it  a  rare  outlier  in  comparison 
with most observed explosives.  Tailoring porous silicon combustion for lead-free initiators 
Nicholas W. Piekiel Christopher J. Morris Wayne A. Churaman David M. Lunking Brian Fuchs 
U.S. Army Armament Research Development and Engineering Center Picatinny NJ USA 
Jeffrey Smyth Emily Cordaro-Gioia and Daniel Stec 
Sensors and Electron Devices Directorate 
U.S. Army Research Laboratory Adelphi MD USA 
Leidos Inc. Picatinny NJ USA 
Abstract. A series of rapid combustion experiments are reported that provide evidence to 
support multiple reaction pathways through a porous siliconsodium perchlorate system.  
These  experiments  were  designed  to  isolate  the  effects  of  the  various  energy  transport 
mechanisms.  By separating two strips of a porous silicon energetic material a convective 
energy transfer mode was observed but deterring this convective mode indicated that the 
reaction  could  still  propagate  very  rapidly  as  unsteady  jump  events  were  observed.  
These unsteady propagation jumps are attributed to shock waves traveling through the test 
substrates  that  carry  enough  energy  to  initiate  combustion  downstream.    This  rapidly 
reacting  porous  silicon  provides  energy  at  a  rate  capable  of  igniting  primary  energetic 
materials and could be used in future fuzing applications.  
On-chip energetic porous silicon offers many 
requirements  lithographically  defined  precision 
micrometer  scale  features  the  use  of  microgram 
quantities and lead-free reactants forming a potent 
pyrotechnic or energetic material.  Several studies 
have  been  performed  to  quantitatively  analyze 
porous  silicon  combustion  1  6  10  11.    From 
these  studies  porous  silicon  has  been  shown  to 
have  a  wide  range  of  combustion  performance 
with on-chip burn speeds ranging from 1 to 3600 
ms 9 11.  The high end of this range allows for 
very rapid energy release that has potential for use 
in fuzing but due in part to the likely presence of 
multiple  combustion  mechanisms  much  is  still 
unknown  about  the  controlling  parameters  of 
porous  silicon  combustion  particularly  at  burn 
rates  1500 ms.  A better understanding of these 
mechanisms will contribute significantly to the use 
applications as well as other promising areas such 
as micro-propulsion. 
Rapid  flame  propagation  in  porous  silicon  is 
often  accompanied by  other observed  phenomena 
such  as  unsteady  flame  propagation  events  or 
demonstrated for moderate and rapid flame speeds 
7 11.  For moderate speeds 200 ms Plummer 
et  al.  hypothesized  that  lift-off  of  the  porous 
silicon film results in confinement of hot product 
gases  which  then  escape  at  weak  points  further 
along  the  porous  silicon  film  11.    For  rapid 
combustion  1500  ms  we  have  suggested  that 
flame jumps may be caused by acoustic or shock 
events  traveling  through  the  porous  silicon  film 
ahead  of  the  main  reaction  front  at  the  acoustic 
velocity  again  affecting  weak  points  in  the  film 
and triggering a combustion event upstream of the 
propagation 9.  In that study we compared flame 
jumps  with  the  speed of  sound of various porous 
silicon films.  However more evidence for shock 
or  acoustic  waves  causing  flame  jumps  would 
solidify this hypothesis. 
reaction  mechanism  at  previously 
demonstrated  flame  speeds  exceeding  3 kms 
appears  complex.    Typically  for  rapid  burning  of 
solid  propellants  convective  heat 
thought  to  be  a  major  contributor  to  the  reaction 
process 3 5 12 15.  However phenomena such 
as the jumping events described above are difficult 
to  explain  with  a  convective  combustion 
mechanism and could be due to shock within the 
porous  silicon  film.    The  speed of  sound  through 
silicon  is  8500  ms  but  the  speed  of  sound  in 
porous silicon varies with porosity 4.  Fan et al 
measured the speed of sound in porous silicon to 
be  as  low  as  700  ms  84  for  high  porosity 
films and up to 3000 ms for lower porosity films 
57.    Given  that  the  characteristic  acoustic 
impedance in bulk single crystal silicon is nearly 
10X  that  in  porous  silicon  it  is  reasonable  to 
expect that acoustic waves in a porous silicon film 
will be confined to the film.  Given that the speed 
of sound in porous silicon is so close to observed 
flame  speeds  detonation  or  deflagration 
detonation  transition  should  be  considered.    The 
jump events observed could be indicative of such a 
In this study we present evidence for acoustic 
shock  initiation  during  the  rapid  combustion  of 
porous silicon.  We note that our use of the term 
acoustic  shock  differs  from  the  conventional  use 
of  shock  in  the  context  of  a  detonation.    We 
performed  several  experiments  to  investigate  the 
previously  described  flame 
provide  evidence  that  the  effect  is  due  to  an 
acoustic or shock event rather than a convectively 
controlled  mechanism. 
detonating  systems  are  observed  in  a  confined 
environment  this  unconfined  combustion  system 
may  be  in  a  deflagration  to  detonation  transition 
without achieving a full detonation front.  A better 
understanding of this phenomenon is necessary for 
the  future  use  of  porous  silicon  in  fuzing  and 
Fig.  1  A  sample  porous  silicon  strip  used  for 
typical flame speed experiments.   
Table 1.  Material properties for flame propagation 
studies.  The 201 samples were used in Figs. 2 3 
and 811.  The 31 sample was used in Figs. 47. 
initiation applications.  Finally we demonstrate in 
this report the feasibility of such applications using 
energetic porous silicon. 
Energetic Porous Silicon Formation 
All  samples  for  the  current  study  were  made 
on-chip  with  common  microelectromechanical 
systems  MEMS  fabrication  techniques.    The 
wafers  were  obtained 
from  Rogue  Valley 
Microdevices  Medford  OR  and  were  1-10 
cm  double  side  polished  with  a  double  sided 
low-pressure  chemical  vapor  deposited  LPCVD 
silicon  nitride  Si3N4  protective 
photolithography  process  was  used  to  selectively 
macrostructure of the silicon strips that were later 
used  in  the  porous  silicon  etch  process.    The 
backside  Si3N4  was  removed  and  replaced  with 
platinum  by  LGA  Thin  Films  Inc.  Santa  Clara 
CA which acts as a cathode during the galvanic 
porous  silicon  etch  process.    To  initiate  the 
energetic  formulation  a  bridgewire  shown  in 
Figure 1 consisting of a chrome-platinum-gold trilayer  was  patterned  atop  the  silicon  substrate.  
Prior  to  the  porous  silicon  etch  samples  were 
diced  into  individual  test  strips.    The  material 
properties for the samples that were utilized in the 
Fig.  3  Experimental  setups  to  probe  the  energy 
transfer  mechanisms  for  rapid  porous  silicon 
combustion.    A.    Physical  gap  ranging  from 
1-5 mm  placed  between  two  energetic  porous 
silicon strips.  B.  Convective flow of hot product 
gases  above  the  porous  silicon  film  obstructed 
with a 2 mm wide plexiglass plate. 
the pores via a dropcasting method.  This method 
utilized a nearly saturated 3.2M solution of sodium 
perchlorate  NaClO4  in  methanol  MeOH.    The 
solution  was  then  allowed  to  wet  into  the  pores 
using a dropper and the system was dried in N2.  
After  application  of  the  oxidizer  the  energetic 
system was triggered in a N2 environment using a 
gold  bridgewire  shown  in  Fig.  1.    The  electrical 
pulse  used  to  heat  the  bridgewire  simultaneously 
triggered  an  image  capture  process  at  930000 
frames  per  second  using  a  Photron  FASTCAM 
SA5 high speed camera.  Fig. 2 shows consecutive 
images  obtained  from  the  image  capture  process 
for combustion of a porous silicon strip. 
The  jumping  events  previously  observed  for 
rapid  porous  silicon  combustion  have  been 
hypothesized to be triggered by shock propagation 
through  the  porous  silicon  matrix  2  9.    Other 
explanations  for  flame  front  jumping  have  been 
provided  for  slower  burning  systems  of  film  liftoff  and  subsequent  confinement  of  hot  product 
gases  that  produce  a  jetting  effect  11  and 
advection of hot particles ahead of the flame front 
14.  In an attempt to show that these mechanisms 
are  not  responsible  for 
observed for very rapid flame speeds of 1.5 kms 
we  have  designed  several  experiments  to  isolate 
the effects of either a convective or shock driven 
mechanism.  Fig. 3 shows the various setups that 
were  used  for  porous  silicon  combustion  tests.  
Fig.  3A  demonstrates  the  role  of  convective 
Fig.  2  Flame  speed  images  for  201  HFEtOH 
etch  condition.    A.    Porous  silicon  strip  prior  to 
combustion.  B.  Consecutive flame speed images 
taken  at  930000  fps.    A  propagation  jump  is 
observed downstream.  
detonation  experiments  described  below  are 
detailed in Table 1.  Material characterization and 
flame  speeds  were  determined 
previously 9 10.  It should be noted that porosity 
refers to the porous silicon film resulting from the 
etch  alone.    Once  the  pores  are  filled  with  the 
the  final  porosity  will  be 
siliconoxidizer composite porosity for these films 
The  galvanic  porous  silicon  etch  process  has 
been described in detail elsewhere 1 2 13.  The 
individual test strips were dipped into a solution of 
hydrofluoric  acid  HF  ethanol  EtOH  and 
hydrogen peroxide H2O2.  The ratio of HFEtOH 
was varied to alter the pore size and porosity of the 
porous  silicon  film  and  H2O2  was  added  to  both 
etch solutions at 2.4 by volume.  The etch time 
was typically 10 minutes however this time could 
be varied to alter the etch depth.  After creating the 
porous silicon film an oxidizer was embedded into 
Fig.  5  Flame  front  position  vs.  time  for  the 
experiment depicted in Fig. 4.  PS 1 and PS 2 
denote  the  first  and  second  porous  silicon  strips 
fit  slopes  are  shown 
indicating propagation velocities. 
the  experiment  depicted  in  Fig.  3B  contained  a 
2mm  wide  plexiglass  plate  set  atop  the  porous 
silicon  film  prior  to  application  of  the  oxidizer 
solution.  This barrier was held in place on the top 
of the sample but was not adhered to the surface.  
Again we hypothesized that flame jumps might be 
induced  by  acoustic  shock  traveling  through  the 
porous silicon film resulting in combustion on the 
other side of the barrier.  However the plexiglass 
barrier was intended to block any convective flow 
above the porous silicon film. 
Results and Discussion 
the  effect  of  convective 
heating  two  porous  silicon  strips  were  placed 
5 mm  apart  as  in  Fig.  3A.    Fig  4  shows  the 
resulting  flame  propagation  images  and  Fig.  5 
shows the plot of flame front position vs. time.  By 
two  samples  we  essentially 
eliminated the role of conduction for heat transfer 
between the two separated sides of porous silicon.  
Despite a 5 mm gap it can be seen that hot product 
gases bridged the  air-gap  through  convection  and 
continued  flame  propagation  through  the  second 
sample  at  a  similar  rate  to  the  first  although  a 
significant  delay  was  observed  as  the  convective 
cloud  crossed  the  gap  at  607  ms  slightly  below 
the speed of sound in air.   
Fig. 4 Consecutive images for flame propagation 
taken  at  930000  frames  per  second  for  the 
experimental  shown  in  Fig.  3A  with  a  5 mm  gap 
between porous silicon samples. The top image is 
a  still  frame  taken  before  ignition  and  the  times 
shown  are  following  the  first  observed  ignition 
heating  as  the  hot  product  gases  were  allowed  to 
bridge  an  air-gap  that  allowed  continuation  of 
flame propagation.   
downstream of the flame front during rapid porous 
silicon combustion we expected the configuration 
in Fig. 3A to exhibit any flame jumps for the strip 
on  the  right  side  of  the  configuration  i.e.  the 
second  strip  only  after  combustion  began  on  the 
second  strip.    If  the  gap  reduced  to  a  negligible 
amount and the strips were actually touching we 
hypothesized that flame jumps before combustion 
began on the second strip was possible through an 
acoustic shock or wave which would transfer from 
one  sample  to  the  next  given  that  they  were  in 
contact.  In all cases we expected convective flow 
of  hot  gases  through  the  ambient  environment  to 
ignite the second strip even when a significant gap 
existed  between  the  two  samples.      In  order  to 
investigate the interruption of any convective flow 
in rapid porous silicon combustion the convective 
is  dominant  and  can  effectively 
transport  enough  energy  to  promote  the  reaction 
on a reasonably fast timescale.  It can be seen in 
both systems that no flame jumps occurred ahead 
of the flame front for the strip on the right side of 
each  gap  until  combustion  was  clearly  triggered 
on that sample by hot product gases from the left.  
We  do  note  a  small  flame  jump  in  Fig.  6  at 
11.83 s also shown in Fig. 7 which appeared to 
be  initiated  by  an  acoustic  impulse  traveling  at 
2000 ms  near  the  expected  speed  of  sound  of 
20002500 ms  for  65  porosity  porous  silicon 
The  experimental  setup  in  Figure  3B  used 
only one strip but had a plexiglass barrier placed 
atop the porous silicon to prohibit the flow of the 
hot  reactive  gases  across  the  top  of  the  strip.    In 
Fig. 8 an example of convective flow blocking is 
shown.    After  relatively  steady  combustion  at 
2230 ms  to  the  left  of  the  barrier  see  Fig.  9 
there  was  an  apparent  jet  of  non-combusting 
gasses to the right of the plexiglass barrier.  This 
jet  appeared  to  flow  at  664  ms  may  have 
originated  from  a  gap  between  the  plexiglass 
barrier  and  the  surface  of  the  sample  and  may 
have  contributed  to  the  continued  burning  of  the 
film on the right of the barrier.  Once ignition to 
the  right  of  the  barrier  commenced  combustion 
continued  at  the  similar  rate  of  2350 ms.    With 
convective  flow  above  the  porous  silicon  film 
blocked  any  rapid  high  speed  combustion  event 
on  the  right  side  of  the  plexiglass  barrier  should 
only  be  due  to  an  acoustic  shock  or  impulse 
traveling  through  the  film  and  under  the  barrier.  
We  note  that  the  jet  of  product  gases  below  the 
plexiglass  barrier  propagated  at  a  similar  rate  to 
the  propagation  across  the  gap  in  Figs.  3  and  4.  
However  this  jet  of  gas  is  optically  less  intense 
than the hot product gases to the left of the barrier 
and  presumably  at  a  lower  temperature  that  does 
not  provide  enough  energy  to  immediately  ignite 
the sample to the right of the barrier.    
Because  the  flame  jumps  observed  in  Fig.  2 
and  Fig.  6  are  thought  to  occur  at  mechanically 
weak  spots  in  the  porous  silicon  film  they  are 
somewhat inconsistent to observe without the use 
of  patterned  microstructures  as  in  9  to  engineer 
mechanical instabilities where desired.  However 
in the case of Fig. 10 we observed a flame jump to 
Fig. 6 Consecutive images for flame propagation 
taken  at  930000  frames  per  second  for  the 
experimental  shown  in  Fig.  3A  with  a  1 mm  gap 
between porous silicon samples. The top image is 
a still frame taken before ignition. 
Fig.  7  Flame  front  position  vs.  time  for  the 
experiment depicted in Fig. 6.  PS 1 and PS 2 
denote  the  first  and  second  porous  silicon  strips 
fit  slopes  are  shown 
indicating propagation velocities.  
Figures  6  and  7  depict  a  similar  experiment 
with a 1 mm gap.  We observed little to no delay 
in  the  propagation  rate  as  the  product  gases 
bridged  the  air-gap  and  continued  propagation  to 
the  other  side  probably  because  at  the  same  gap 
crossing rate of 600 ms as in Figures 4 and 5 the 
product gases require only about one video frame 
to cross the gap.  These results support the theory 
that when steady propagation events are observed 
Fig.  9    Flame  front  position  vs.  time  for  the 
experiment depicted in Fig. 8.  Linear fit slopes are 
shown  indicating  propagation  velocities  of  both 
combustion  flame  fronts  as  well  as  an  apparent 
convective flow of gas across or under the barrier.  
shown  in  Fig.  11.    At  least  two  other  initiation 
points to the right of the barrier were also visible at 
9.68 s.    But  the  only  way  for  the  rightmost 
initiation  event  to  occur  when  it  did  was  for  an 
acoustic  disturbance  to  travel  through  the  porous 
silicon  film  at  what  appears  to  be  its  acoustic 
velocity.    Any  convection  or  other  mechanism 
suggested in the past would have been blocked by 
These results collectively suggest that despite 
the  different  experimental  setups  used 
mechanism  for  flame  propagation  jumps  is  the 
We tested porous silicon initiators tailored for 
this rapid combustion regime with various primary 
and secondary energetic materials and found them 
to  be  viable  alternatives  to  conventional  hotwire 
testing  has  demonstrated 
successful  initiation  of  lead  Pb  styphnate  and 
silver  azide-based  primary  charges  quantified 
through dents left in aluminum witness blocks by 
these charges.  Dent depth ranged from 45.9 m to 
47.8 m.    Twenty  seven  porous  silicon  initiator 
chips  were  also  successfully  tested  with  lead 
styphnate  establishing  an  initiation  threshold  of 
1.92  V  following  a  Neyer  Test  series.    Direct 
initiation  of  secondary  explosive  charges  was 
Fig. 8 Consecutive images for flame propagation 
taken  at  930000  frames  per  second  for  the 
experimental  setup  shown  in  Fig.  3B.  The  top 
image  is  a  still  frame  taken  before  ignition  with 
dashed lines to aid in visualizing the viewing angle 
and location of the barrier. 
the right of the barrier at 8.6 s before any other 
combustion had visibly commenced on that side of 
the  barrier.    This  ignition  event  commenced  at  a 
time  which  was  consistent  with  an  acoustic 
disturbance  propagating  at  2.62  kms  which  is 
near  the  expected  speed  of  sound  of  2000
2500 ms  for  65  porosity  porous  silicon  4.  
Interestingly  this  ignition  caused  a  combustion 
front which burned to the left at the same rate as 
the  combustion  front  burning  to  the  right  as 
Fig.  11    Flame  front  position  vs.  time  for  the 
experiment depicted in Fig. 10.  Linear fit slopes 
are  shown  indicating  propagation  velocities  of 
both  combustion  flame  fronts  as  well  as  an 
apparent  convective  flow  of  gas  across  or  under 
to  convection  but  rather  perturbations  within  the 
test substrate that can trigger the reaction.  These 
perturbations within the porous silicon film appear 
to  consistently  propagate  at  or  near  the  acoustic 
velocity in the film.  Regardless of the mechanism 
it  has  been  demonstrated  that  the  intense  porous 
silicon  reaction  releases  energy  at  a  rate  that  is 
capable  of  initiating  primary  energetic  materials 
and  could  be  a  useful  material  for  future  fuzing 
and initiation applications. Detonation-like Processes in Solid Fuel-Oxidizer Mechanoactivated Composites 
Alexander Yu. Dolgoborodov Vladimir G. Kirilenko Michael A. Brazhnikov Victor A. Teselkin 
Andrew N. Streletskii and Arseny A. Shevchenko 
 Semenov Institute of Chemical Physics RAS  
Kosygin St. 4 Moscow Russia 
 National Research Nuclear University MEPhI 
Kashirskoye shosse 31 Moscow Russia 
Abstract.  The  results  on  mechanochemical  activation  in  fueloxidizer  mixtures  are 
presented.  In  the  course  of  the  study  with  a  number  of  mixtures  there  were  found 
optimum  activation  regimes  which  depends  on  component  mass  ratio  and  mixture 
formulation. Some new results on mechanochemical activation of Al-containing mixtures 
based on perchlorate potassium or ammonium are obtained. The activated perchloratebased  mixtures  demonstrate  significant  increase  in  burning  velocity  as  well  as  in 
The  main  goal  of  this  work  is  to  develop 
scientific  bases  of  production  of  new  energetic 
materials with increased rates of energy release at 
the  processes  of  combustion  and  detonation. 
Mechanochemical  activation  is  one  of  the  new 
ways  of  production  of  such  materials  activation 
the  course  of  mixing  micron-size 
powders  in  high  energy  ball  mills.  Both  grinding 
of the initial components with partial components 
diffusion  and  producing  of  the  defects  in  crystal 
structure take place at mixture treating. At the ICP 
RAS  the  technique  of  mechanoactivation  of 
oxidizermetal fuel mixtures has been in operation 
since 20021. In so doing the synthesized materials 
become  known  as  mechanoactivated  energetic 
The  conditions  for  MAECs  production  are 
selected to ensure the maximum degree of particle 
crushing their uniform mixing and activation but 
avoiding  possible  chemical  interaction  between 
components.  Previously  obtained 
activation  of  MeOx  mixtures  Me    Al  Mg  Si 
Ox    S  MoO3  Teflon  etc.  showed 
perspectives of this type of investigation. MAECs 
demonstrate  the  ability  of  self-sustained  chemical 
velocities234.  So  for  AlTeflon  and  MgTeflon 
MAECs  steady  detonation-like  modes  have  been 
obtained  for  the  first  time.  The  similar  technique 
Arrested Reactive Milling was developed in New 
Jersey Institute of Technology5.  
In  this  report  the  analysis  of  previously 
obtained  results  as  well  as  new  data  on  Alcontaining  MAECs 
perchlorate  and  ammonium  perchlorate  are 
As initial materials for mixes there were used 
chemically  pure  perchlorates 
potassium PP and ammonium AP with average 
particle size 50  100 m and Al powders flaked 
PP-2  with  flakes  of  50    200  m    25  m 
spherical ASD-6 with average particle size 3.6 m 
and spherical Al8 with particles of 280 nm.  
Al mass content was varied from 20 to 40 
nearby stoichiometric ratio which is 34.265.8 and 
for  AlPP  and  AlAP  mixtures 
The  mixing  of  the  components  accompanied 
by  activation  was  performed  in  stainless  steel 
drums  of  a  planetary  ball  mill  Activator  2SL 
JSC Activator  Novosibirsk Russia. The mass 
ratio of the mixture to the stainless steel balls was 
10 g to 300 g. In order to prevent any possibility of 
an explosion to be caused by friction heating-up in 
the course of mixing it is necessary to provide thin 
liquid  layer  in-between  solid  particles  and  balls. 
So  50-60  g  hexane  was  added  into  the  mixtures 
which were treated in the cycle mode using water 
cooling  of  the  drums.  The  time  duration  of  the 
cycle  was  60  s  while  total  operating  time 
considered  as  the  time  of  activation  tact  was 
varied  from  2  min  to  60  min.  Activated  mixture 
conglomerates  so  the  product  was  sifted  through 
the  sieve  with  the  mesh  size  0.4  mm.  Initial 
the  produced  MAECs  were 
analyzed  using  X-ray  diffraction  technique  and 
scanning electron microscopy SEM.  
X-ray diffraction analysis showed no chemical 
reaction  between  components  which  were 
activated up to tact 30 min. Only the lines of two 
phases of perchlorate and Al are seen in the X-ray 
diffraction  diagrams  and  slight  Fe  traces  about 
tenth  of  percent  can  be  detected.  Fe  impurity  in 
the MAECs is produced as the result of grinding of 
steel drums and balls. 
SEM  analyses  showed  more  uniformity  of 
MAECs  made  of  flaked  Al  PP-2  in  comparison 
with those made of spherical ASD-6 see e.g. Fig.1. 
SEM images given in the Figure were made for 
MAECs AlPP of the same component mass ratio 
4060  and  activation  time  but  differed  in  Al 
powder used ASD-6 for MAEC shown in Fig.1a 
and PP-2 for that in Fig. 1b.  
In both PP-based mixes rather quick grinding 
of  PP  particles  takes  place  while  there  is  a 
difference  in  milling  of  Al  powder  of  different 
types. Spherical particles of ASD-6 are deformed 
into relatively large particles pellets of several 
microns  in  size  arranged  separately  from  the  PPparticles.  In  case  of  using  flaked  PP-2  more 
uniform  micron  and  submicron  composites  were 
produced  in  the  form  of  Al  flakes  covered  by 
Fig. 1. SEM images of the MAECs AlPP 4060 
tact  30 min a - ASD-6 b - PP-2  
Experimental Results 
low-friction-limit  ll 
Mechanical  sensitivity  of  the  MAECs  to 
friction  was  studied  using  friction  pendulum 
machine K-44-3. The sensitivity was characterized 
loading pressure at which no explosion is observed 
in a series of 10 shots. For AlPP MAECs ll was 
measured at the level of primary HE ll  20  30 
MPa  for  lead  azide  ll    30  MPa.  Mechanical 
sensitivity  of  activated  AlAP  occupies  an 
intermediate  position  between  such  sensitive 
explosives  as  bistrinitroethylnitramine  and  lead 
For  loose-packed  mixes    20  of  TMD  both 
burning  and  detonation  velocities  were  measured 
in stainless steel tubes 10 mm in diameter and 120 
The  tubes  were  charged  in  portions  with 
consequent  mixture  hand-pressing  to  a  given 
placed into Al tube 18-mm diameter for PP-based 
mixture  and  17-mm  diameter  for  AP  one  was 
investigated  recording  radiation  of  the  burning 
products.  Intensity  of  radiation  emitted  by  the 
reaction products through windows PMMA discs 
8 mm of thick was measured by optical pyrometer 
at two wavelengths 420 and 627 nm.  
The  results  for  AlPP  3070  and  AlAP 
2080  charges  made  of  the  mixtures  activated 
within 10 min of different length are presented in 
density.  The  tested  mixtures  were  ignited  by 
heated  Nichrom  wire  which  was  located  nearby 
the closed end of the tube. The rate of the burning 
process along the tube was measured using optical 
fibers  inserted  into  the  tube  on  a  half  of  its 
diameter in order to prevent possible influence of 
flame  passage  along  the  tube  wall.  The  fibers 
transmitted  the  light  emitted  by  burning  products 
in the reaction zone to photodiodes. The electrical 
signals were recorded by digital oscilloscopes. 
studied.  For  example 
In  both  types  of  perchlorate-based  mixtures 
deflagration  to  detonation  transition  DDT  along 
experimental  data  on  AlAP  2080  composition 
with tact  10 min are shown in Fig. 2. There are 
presented  the  results  on  the  velocities  averaged 
over the measuring base. In so doing the velocities 
are ascribed to the middles of the measuring bases 
the  distances  shown  in  the  graph  were  measured 
from the ignition point. 
Fig. 2. Deflagration-to-detonation transition in 
AlAP 2080 tact  10 min in a steel tube 
10 mm in diameter.  
For  tested  loose-packed  mixes    20  of 
TMD  AlAP  2080    tact    10  min  the  DDT 
length  LDDT  ranges  from  65  to  75  mm  and 
detonation  velocity  D  ranges  from  2.0  to  2.5 
kms.  In  general  it  was  found  that  DDT  lengths 
depended on activation time and components mass 
ratio  as  well.  For  AlPP  3070  LDDT    40    60 
mm and D  1.2  1.4 kms. 
Detonation  front  formation  in  activated 
compositions  in  the  course  of  combustion  wave 
propagation along the charge 1820 of TMD 
Fig. 3 Brightness temperature time-histories 
measured at the interface with PMMA 
window MAECs of different length. The 
numerical notes correspond to charge 
length in mm mcs  micro seconds. 
a  AlPP 3070 b  AlAP2080 
The  presented  temperature  histories  were 
constructed  by  averaging  brightness  temperatures 
measured  on  two  wavelengths.  The  scatter  in  the 
data  of  temperature  in  the  data  in  different  tests 
didnt exceed the instrumental error 150 . In the 
figure  the  length  of  the  charges  is  noted  in  mm 
temperature  time-histories  are  shifted  in  time  so 
they are located corresponding to the charge length. 
In spite of the obvious differences between the 
perchlorate-based  MAECs  there  is  one  common 
feature  which  means  that  the  steady-state  profile 
is  formed  at  the  distance  equal  to  7-8  charge 
diameters.  This  conclusion  correlates  with  the 
picture  of  DDT  presented  in  Fig.2  in  which  one 
can observe quasi-steady-state regime achieved on 
detonation velocities. 
Optimum activation time 
For loose-packed AlAP it was obtained that 
the  velocity  of  reaction 
the  dependence  of 
propagation  on  the  activation  time.  The  velocity 
was  measured  at  20-mm  base  situated  in  70  mm 
from  the  ignition  wire.  So  the  velocity  of  the 
reaction propagation increases from 120 ms tact  
2 min  convective burning to 2500 ms tact  10 
min    detonation  see  Fig.4.  While 
activation  up  to  tact    60  min  slightly  decreases 
the velocity D  23502400 ms. It is also seen 
from the Fig. 4 that the type of Al PP-2 or Al8 
doesnt affect the measured velocity. 
Fig. 4. The velocity of burningdetonation process 
2080  composites  versus 
activation time 1  PP-2 2  Al8. 
For high dense pressed charges 85-90 of 
TMD  made  of  mechanoactivated  AlPP  3070 
there were measured burning velocities. The tested 
samples  were  12  mm  of  height  and  9  mm  in 
diameter lateral surface of the pellets was covered 
by thin layer of epoxy. The samples were burned 
in  the  bomb  of  constant  volume  in  nitrogen  the 
initial  pressure  of  gas  p  varied  from  0.5  to  8 
MPa. The burning time was measured according to 
the  adopted  procedure  basing  on  the  pressure 
variation  in  the  bomb.  The  average  burning  rate 
u was determined as the ratio of sample height to 
The  dependence  of  burning  rate  on  initial 
pressure tact  10 min can be written as following 
u 84.2p0.51 where u is given in mms and p   in 
MPa.  The  obtained  data  as  the  dependence  of 
burning  rate  versus  activation  time  at  p    2  MPa 
are given in Fig. 5. 
Fig. 5. Burning velocity of AlPP 3070 composite 
versus activation time at p  2 MPa.  
The  obtained  experimental  data  of  burning 
velocity  can  be  approximated  whether  by 
smoothed line or  by broken one consisted of two 
the  point  tact  11.6  min 
u  184  ms  see  Fig.  5.  It  is  seen  that  burning 
velocity rapidly increase from 25 to 185 ms with 
activation  time  growth  from  2  min  to  11.5  min 
while the further activation time increase leads to 
much  slower  growth  of  the  velocity  so  the 
maximum value was 220 ms at tact  30 min. So 
we can conclude for both loose-packed and highdense perchlorate-based MAECs that 10 minutes is 
quite enough for effective activation. 
Detonation velocity in pressed AlAP MAECs  
activated within 10 min mixture pressed to 75 of 
TMD were studied in the charges which diameters 
d  varied  from  15  to  50  mm.  An  example  of 
experimental set-up is shown in Fig. 6.  
AP-based  composites 
initiated  by  detonator 
through RDX thin pellets and booster charge of the 
same density as the charges tested for 40-mm and 
50-mm  charges  in  diameter  plane-wave generator 
made from RDX with wax was used. The time of 
detonation  wave  travelling  along  the  base  was 
measured with assistance of contact foil gages in 
so doing there were measured detonation velocity 
D averaged over the base equal approximately to 
the charge diameter.  
of 15 mm and 17 mm the detonation is observed 
to  be  of  slow-damping  character  with  charge 
the  velocity  decreases  below 
Dcr 3800 ms. Further distance growth results in 
sharp  detonation  failure.  All  experimental  data  in 
the  field  of  steady-state  detonation  can  be 
approximated  by  linear  dependence  D    6.12  - 
34.5d where D  kms d  mm see line 1 in 
Fig. 6. Experimental set-up for detonation velocity 
measurements  in  high-dense  AlAP  2080 
The  D-values  ascribed  to  the  middles  of  the 
measuring bases versus the distance from the end 
of the booster charge are given in Fig. 7 8. 
Fig.8. Detonation velocity for AlAP 2080 
compositions at 0.75 of TMD versus 
reciprocal charge diameter. 
1  linear approximation of the D. Price6 data 
2  D-values for steady-state detonation in 
activated mixtures  3  linear approximation 
of the D-values 4  experimental point for 
non-activated mixture 5  D-values for 
damping detonation in activated mixtures. 
Fig. 7. Detonation velocity versus relative distance 
from the booster charge in AlAP 2080 of 
75  of  TMD  tact    10  min  for  different 
charge diameters d  
1  15 mm 2  17 3  20 4  25 5  40  
6  50 7  25 non-activated 
obtained  for  activated  AlAP  composites  75  of 
TMD it was found steady-state detonation in the 
charges  of  d    20  mm.  While  the  steady-state 
mode for different charge diameters does occur at 
different  lengths  from  the  booster  charge  the 
lesser is the diameter than the longer is the relative 
distance  of  the  transition  see  Fig.  7.  We  assume 
that  critical  diameter  of  the  MAEC  tested  lies  in 
the range of 1720 mm. For the charge diameters 
Let  us  consider  the  data  obtained  for  the 
charges 17- and 15-mm in diameter. One can see the 
detonation  process  has  damped  see  Fig.  7  so  it 
would not be correct to use the Dd relation given 
above.  Nevertheless 
the  detonation  velocities 
measured at the distance of 3-4 diameters from the 
booster  charge  belong  to  the  constructed  linear 
dependence see the points on the dash line in Fig. 
8. The detonation values measured at the last bases 
are  also  given  in  the  figure  in  order  to  show  the 
detonation sharp decrease in the velocity along the 
measuring  base  so  the  damping  detonation  in  17- 
and 15-mm charges is illustrated by two points for 
each  charge  diameter  in  Fig.  8.  The  constructed 
approximation  Dd  line  3  in  Fig.  8.  is  able  to 
predict  detonation  velocity  for  quasi-steady-state 
regime in wide range of charge diameters. 
demonstrate  higher  detonation  velocities  than  one 
could  expect  basing  on  D.  Price  data  obtained  for 
non-activated  mixtures.  This  issue  correlates  with 
the  data  obtained  for  activated  and  non-activated 
compositions  for  which  detonation  velocity  was 
measured  in  the  charges  of  25-mm  diameter  see 
Fig. 7 8. For non-activated mixture tact  0.5 min 
we  can  observe  larger  distance  of  the  detonation 
transition  to  steady-state  regime  and  less  final 
detonation  velocity.  Possible  decrease  of  critical 
diameter  resulted  from  mechanoactivation  of  the 
mixture is one of the reason for such effects which 
demands for further investigation.  
Aluminized  perchchlorate-based  compositions 
are the explosives of Group II according to Donna 
Price  classification  i.e.  D-values  dependence  on 
charge density demonstrates maximum. So increase 
of  charge  density  from  75  of  TMD  results  in 
velocity  decrease  and detonation failure  see  Fig.9. 
For  20-mm  charge  diameter  detonation  failure  at 
85  of  TMD  is  obvious  while  for  the  charge  of 
80  TMD  and  25-mm  diameter  one  can  see 
detonation slow-damping with length. 
Fig. 9. Detonation velocity versus relative distance 
from  the  booster  charge  in  AlAP  2080 
1  3    d  20  mm  85  and  75  of  TMD 
2  4    d  25  mm  80  and  75  of  TMD 
Detonation  velocity  versus  charge  density 
varied  from  55  to  84  of  TMD  was  measured 
for charges 25 mm in diameter see Fig.10.  
For  charge  density  80  of  TMD  detonation 
velocity slow decreases with charge length L from 
D  4.88 kms slightly overpressed detonation at 
L  1.55d to D  4.054 kms at L  4.67d while 
for the charges 83.5 of TMD D  3.22 kms at L 
  2.26d.  So  we  believe  that  Dmax  corresponds  to 
the  charge 75 of  TMD. D-velocities of  steady 
state  detonation  measured  in  the  AlAP  2080 
charges of different diameters at 75 of TMD are 
given  in  Table  1.  The  D-values  predicted  by  D. 
Price  dependence  obtained 
AlAP  mixtures  are  given  in  the  Table  for 
Table.1. Detonation velocity in 
mechanoactivated AlAP 2080 
Dmax kms  experim.  4.29  4.77  5.27  5.43 
D. Price6 4.59  4.73  4.93  5.00 
Fig. 10. Detonation velocity versus relative charge 
density for AlAP 8020. 
1    D-values  and  their  approximation 
tact10 min present data 
4 3  D-value and linear approximation for 
non-activated mixture D. Price6 
5  D-value tact0.5 min present data 
6  possible D for non-activated mixture 
2   D-values  for  the  loose-packed  mixture 
in steel tube tact10 min present data. 
We  assume  taking  into  account  our  data  for 
d25  mm  that  charges  of  non-activated  mixture 
with diameter less than 25 mm would demonstrate 
detonation  failure.  One  can  deduce  analyzing  the 
data presented in the Table 1 that the velocities for 
the  charges  with  d    25  mm  would  be 
overestimated  by  D.  Price  approximation  while 
the  charges  with  d    25  mm  exhibit  higher 
The D-values for activated tact  10 min and 
non-activated  mixtures  tact    0.5  min  as  well  as 
D. Price data are presented in Table 2.  
Comparing the data one can see that activation 
would  result  in  the  increase  of  D-value  in  the 
charges of d  25 mm at the same relative density. 
Moreover  we  assume  that  mechanoactivation  of 
AlAP mixtures could shift the maximum D-value 
to the higher relative densities this assumption is 
illustrated by the curve 6 see Fig. 10 constructed 
for  the  charges  of  d    25  mm.  Of  course  the 
assumption  should  be  verified  experimentally  for 
the  charges  made  of  the  same  components  and 
prepared identically. 
Table 2. D-values for activated and nonactivated  AlAP  with  different  Al 
For  AlAP  mixtures  component  mass  ratio 
8020 was found optimum for detonation in loosepacked  charges.  While  for  high-dense  charges 
75 of TMD growth of Al content from 10 to 
20  results  in  detonation  velocity  decrease  this 
effect is less prominent if one compare the results 
for the charges of 55 TMD which were obtained 
in this work and by D. Price see Table 2. 
mechanoactivated energetic composition MAEC 
based on aluminum and perchlorates of potassium 
and ammonium has been developed. The results of 
research  allow  us 
mechanoactivation as a way to control the burning 
rate and detonation velocity. In the AlAP charges 
same  density  mechanoactivation 
increases the detonation velocity in comparison to 
that measured for non-activated mixtures.  
The short length of the transition to detonation 
and  high  sensitivity  make  it  possible  to  consider 
MAECs Al  perchlorates as promising energetic 
compositions  with  increased  requirements  in  the 
speeds of energy release. 
This work was supported by RFBR grant No 1203-00651  and  the  program  of  the  Presidium  of 
RAS No 2 section 1 Energy and the mechanics 
of  fast  processes  and  self-organization  in  plasma 
gas and condensed matter Laser Deflagration-to-Detonation in Keto-RDX doped with Resonant Hollow Gold 
High Explosives  Applications Facility Mailstop L-281 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94550 
      Abstract. 2-Oxo-135-trinitro-135-triazacyclohexane Keto-RDX or K-6 the most 
powerful energetic material among nitrourea secondary explosives is utilized in an laser 
initiated  Deflagration-to-Detonation  DDT  detonator  that  takes  advantage  of  a  short 
column  length  and  millijoule  initiation  thresholds  without  the  drawbacks  of  a  primary 
explosive such as CP and its attendant electrical and shock sensitivity. The combination of 
Mie  resonant  hollow  gold  nanoshells  HGNs  intermixed  with  the  explosive  allows  for 
very rapid laser heating of the highly exothermic explosive in a package that is naturally 
lightning-safe.  Measurements of the interior of the HE column shows that DDT transition 
occurred within 2  mm or less from  the front optical  window upon which the  laser was 
focused. The dimensions of small gold nanoshells have an excitation wavelength of 810nm tuned to the Mie resonance of the gold nanoshell. Thermocouple measurements of a 
mock  material  pentaerythritol  doped  at  0.05  show  an  increase  to  1800o  C  within 
milliseconds with this heating rate measurement limited by the transient response of the 
small  thermocouple.    The  highly  exothermic  decomposition  of  K-6  provides  enough 
release of energy to transition from deflagration to detonation in 2-3 mm from the focal 
point  as  the  laser  light  is  absorbed  by  the HGNs dispersed  upon  the  surface  of  the  K-6 
      The ball-milled K-6 was mixed with an aqueous solution of hollow gold nanoshells 
HGNs at a concentration of 1012 HGNscc and vigorously mixed to wet the particulates 
thoroughly with the water nanoshell solution and vacuum dried to the original weight of 
the K-6 material. This unique application of a DDT detonator uses nano-resonant doped 
explosive with a secondary explosive that runs up to detonation in less than 3 mm. Full 
order  detonation  was  achieved  with  130  millijoules  of  energy  using  a  free-space  air 
transport laser beam focused to an 800 m spot at a fluence of 2000 wattscm2 for 12.1 
milliseconds upon HGN doped K-6 with an HE mass of 70 milligrams.  
Low-Energy Laser Initiation of Explosives 
The last two decades have seen development 
of  laser-initiated  detonators  with  the  purpose  of 
seeking  higher  margins  of  safety  in  detonators 
used in weapon systems and test-firing operations. 
Although high-power electrical detonators have an 
excellent safety record current development work 
the explosive mixture these tiny HGNs then act to 
replace the normally shock-induced hotspots from 
PdV work on gas compression by pore collapse of 
the voids in a pressed explosive from an initiating 
shockwave  usually  caused  by  impact  or  shock 
Absorption Curves of Hollow Gold Nanoshells 
the  circumference. 
This  resonant  absorption  of  the  HGNs  is 
achieved by tuning the classic Mie resonance of a 
conducting  sphere  into  a  dipole  resonance  mode 
the  surface  plasmon 
wavelength at the gold-dielectric interface to be an 
integral  value  of 
nanoshells are on the order of 43 nm in diameter 
approximation  for  surface  plasmon  wavelength 
where  the  surface  plasmon  wavelength  is  far 
shorter  than  the  excitation  wavelength  of  light 
808.2  nanometers  and  the  symbol  m  and  d 
represent  the  dielectric  function  of  the  metal  and 
dielectric respectively as show in equation 1.  
Figure 1 illustrates the tuned HGN absorption 
curve for a suspension of nanoshells in water as a 
function  of  wavelength  for  both  a  solution  of 
nanoshells  in  water  and  a  projected  curve  for  an 
air-dried  film.    The  absorption  curve  also  shows 
the quadrapole resonance which is less efficient at 
relative absorption seen as the small side peak to 
the  right  of  the  peak  absorption.    The  absorption 
curve  shift  that  occurs  when  the  solvent  is 
removed  by  evaporation  and  the  nanoshells  are 
evaporated onto a surface is due to the change in 
surface plasmon wavelength at the gold-dielectric 
interface  as  the  dielectric  constant  shifts  from 
water to an air dielectric.  
is  focused  towards  reducing  the  possibility  of 
accidental initiation by sources in nature such as 
lightning  and  has  sought  to  provide  an  initiation 
source that has both electromagnetically immunity 
and has no natural counterpart. Towards this end 
there  has  been  significant  development  of  new 
high-power  detonators  using  a  non-electrical 
source  such  as  a  short  duration  high-peak-power 
laser  pulse.  These  laser  detonators  use  lowefficiency  pulsed  lasers  that  usually  employ  Qswitching  and  pulse  durations  in  the  nanosecond 
regime. This paper examines a low-average power 
laser  detonator  using  a  highly  efficient  thermal 
initiation  mechanism  to  reduce  the  need  for  the 
high  peak  of  q-switched 
accompanying  low  electrical  efficiency.    These 
systems  are  low-average  energy  systems  tens  of 
watts  over  milliseconds of highly  efficient  diode 
lasers for low-energy optically initiated detonators 
providing the advantage of an efficient diode laser 
source with low susceptibility from electrostatic or 
electromagnetic  damage.    Previous  development 
work  in  this  low-average-energy  laser  initiation 
regime used either primary explosives which have 
their  own  intrinsic  handling  and  packaging  risks 
or  highly-doped  materials 
initiation  using  carbon-black  or  other  adulterants 
added  at  a  mass-ratio  of  1  to  5  of  the  total 
explosive material.2 This research investigates the 
novel idea of incorporating a very low mass-ratio 
less than 0.1 by weight dopant of HGNs onto 
the surface of suitable secondary explosive crystals 
that detonate when heated rapidly.  Unique to this 
concept these gold nanoshells have been designed 
  These  HGNs  do  not 
photosaturate  like  ordinary  dyes  as  long  as  they 
remain  in  their  hollow  geometry  and  will  stop 
absorbing  only  upon  melting  and  reconsolidation 
into  another  geometry  molten  sphere.  When  an 
aqueous solution of these HGNs prepared as cited 
in Reference 1 is mixed with explosives and the 
water  allowed  to  evaporate  the  HGNs  coat  the 
surface  of  the  explosive  crystals  with  dozens  to 
thousands of HGNs per crystal. This allows for a 
distribution  of  tiny  hot  dipole  resonators  that  are 
mixed in at a very high density 1012 per gram of 
material  to  act  as  distributed  hot-spots  on  the 
surface  of  crystals  within  the  pressed  explosive 
load when illuminated by laser radiation.  Within 
resonantly  absorptive  at  a 
mixed with the HGNs aqueous solution and dried.  
Figure  3  shows  that  penetration  depth  for  an 
aqueous  solution  as  a  function  of  nanoshell 
concentration and the iso-contour bands represent 
the  percentage  of  light  transmitted  by  penetration 
Figure 1. Absorption curve of tuned HGNs 
This is experimentally verified by evaporation 
of a drop of the HGN solution upon a glass slide 
after a batch of HGNs is made and centrifuged to 
increase concentration.  Figure 2 shows an actual 
absorption measurement made of a diluted 10-6 
aqueous  sample  of  HGNs  from  a  prepared  batch 
and  a  thin  film  dried  upon  a  microscope  slide  in 
the  same  spectrophotometer1  and  the  resulting 
40nm redshift of the absorption curve. 
Figure 2.  Absorption offset for Dielectric Index 
Mixing HE with Hollow Gold Nanoshells 
Most conventional secondary explosives have 
no intrinsic absorption in the near IR band that is 
used  to  thermally  heat  these  samples.  To  prepare 
the  samples  for  enhanced  absorption  they  were 
1 Perkin-Elmer LAMBDA 950 Spectrophotometer 
Figure 3  Penetration depth vs. concentration 
This  graph  is  for  a  uniform  refractive  index 
and  in  contrast  to  that  graph  of  solution  the 
pressed  HE  as  a  transparent  powdered  media  is 
highly scattering and may not be well represented 
by this graph.  In practice a deeper penetration is 
desired  into  the  pressed  HE  to  have  the  laser 
energy  absorbed  and  heating  a  critical  volume  of 
HE  hundreds  of  microns  deep  that  can  propagate 
as  a  building  detonation.    Almost  all  of  these 
explosives  that  were  tested  PETN  HMX  RDX 
Hexanitrohexaazaisowurtzitane  are  non-soluble  in 
water and therefore will not dissolve if mixed with 
an  aqueous  HGNs  suspension  therefore  mixing 
them with the HGNs solution will not change the 
particle  size  distribution  of  the  powder.    The 
HGNs were prepared as outlined in Reference 1 
and  centrifuged.    This  HGNs  suspension  was 
mixed with equal amounts 1 ml for each gram in 
unit batches of 2 grams of HE at a time.  The HE 
was  generally  ball-milled  to  a  specific  relative 
surface area if not defined such as with HNS IV 
and as it is not wetted by water must be agitated 
and forced into the aqueous solution until a smooth 
slurry  is  generated.  Upon  drying  the  semi-caked 
dried HE slurry is gently rolled by a mortar against 
an  aluminum  evaporation  pan  until  reduced  to  a 
fine  loose  powder  similar  in  consistency  to  the 
other  HEs  did  react  but  did  not  transition  to  a 
detonation in the 3-mm column length which was 
a  desired  minimal  size.    PETN  performed  the 
worst with frequent melting prior to any charring 
and no gas reaction perhaps an attribute of the low 
melting point. A temperature heating test using an 
embedded  0.010  K-type  thermocouple  Omega 
KMQXL-010U-12  embedded  within  a  nanoshell 
doped  mock  HE  fill  of  pentaerythritol  at  0.5  mm 
temperature  increase  to  1800o  C  within  100 
millieconds  the thermal response limited by the 
sampling rate of the meter. Clearly the temperature 
was  high  enough  for  deflagration  although  as  a 
caveat  this  temperature  is  outside  the  normal 
operating  range  of  a  K-type  thermocouple  that  is 
typically limited to a maximum of 1350o C.   The 
HMX  usually  but  not  consistently  detonated  in 
this  configuration  and  always  reacted  but  a 
column length of 3-mm may be too short to run to 
a  full  detonation  and  the  results  in  terms  of  the 
firing  times  and  integrated  energies  are  shown  in 
Table  1.    Only  K-6  consistently  showed  full 
detonation in all tests at a column length of 3 mm. 
This  was  using  a  total  power  of  10  watts  at  a 
fluence  of  2000  wattscm2  onto  the  fused  silica 
window for 15 to 30 milliseconds.  The reason for 
the  success  with  K-6  may  lay  with  its  unique 
decomposition rate as it undergoes a 97 loss in 
weight  from  185o  C-195o  C  which  indicates  that 
the  thermal  decomposition  of  K-6  is  highly 
exothermic  in  nature  with  almost  single  step 
decomposition  reaction.5  K-6  has 
advantage  of  being  the  most  powerful  of  the 
nitrourea  secondary  explosives  with  an  explosive 
that  of  HMX.6  An 
oscilloscope recorded the timing of the laser light 
and  recorded  the  breakout  time  of  the  Dynasen 
piezo  pin.  K-6  laser  detonator  firing  times  and 
integrated energies are shown Tables 2 and 3 for a 
focal  spot  of  1000  m  and  800  m  in  diameter 
respectively. Minimum spot size achieve with this 
relayed fiber-coupled system was 800 m.   
ball-milled  powder  and  the  nanoshells  add  no 
appreciable mass to the HE samples.  
Laser Detonators tests of Nanoshell doped HE 
 We  tested  powders  at  a  variety  of  different 
densities  starting  with  an  initial  gold  nanoshell 
doped HE powder at a bulk density of 50 into a 
small brass detonator body.  This brass cavity for 
holding the HE was 0.2 inches 5-mm in diameter 
with  a  fused  silica  window  0.4mm  thick  AR 
coated  for  810-nm  laser  light  for  0.5  loss  at 
one end and a front surface mirror on the other end 
of  the  cavity  to  allow  either  light  emission  for 
breakout of the detonation or to impact a Dynasen 
piezo  pin  in  the  confinement  cap  thus  recording 
the  explosive  function  time.    Initial  tests  showed 
that  a  50  bulk  density  was  too  low  for  a  DDT 
detonator  operation  so  a  window  was  added  in  a 
hand-press operation onto the first to compress the 
initial pressing to a density of approximately 75 
for a total column height of 3-mm. Figure 4 shows 
final  cross  section  of  the  laser  detonator  with  the 
input fused silica window the brass body the HE 
load  in  a  brass  die  and  an  un-doped  output 
pressing  2  mm  in  length  above  the  breakout 
Figure 4. Cross Section of Laser Det 
As  the  hand  loading  of  the  IP  of  these  laser 
detonators was not well controlled with the second 
pressing of the window the next sequence of tests 
determined to use a steel die to press the pellets of 
nanoshell  doped  HE  first  and  then  load  these 
pressed and weighed pellets into an internal brass 
die shown as orange. The total mass loaded was 
approximately  70  milligrams  per  laser  detonator 
based on the HE used.  Of all HEs tested the best 
performing  explosive  was  Keto-RDX  K-6  and 
HMX and very little reaction by the rest.  These 
Laser Illumination System for Detonation Tests  
The  laser  used  for  these  tests  was  an  Apollo 
Laser  Diode  of  20  watts  at  808.2  nanometer 
F40-810-1P  driven  by  a 
inductance  driver  Apollo  Laser  D-5100PP  Laser 
Driver capable of switching on the 40-Amp drive 
power for the diode in less than 200 nanoseconds. 
A monitor photodiode provided timing of the laser 
light  and  for  the  initial  tests  of  pulse  duration  as 
controlled  by  a  Stanford  delay  generator  that 
provides  a  30-millisecond  gated  laser  pulse.    As 
this is a fiber coupled laser diode the output beam 
from  the  100  micron  core  fused  silica  fiber  NA 
0.22  was  collimated  with  a  50-mm  focal  length 
fused silica lens AR coated and transited a safety 
shutter onto a focusing lens of 50-mm focal length 
fused silica lens AR Coated that passed the beam 
through  the  uncoated  Lexan  debris  shield  over  a 
port in the laser Detonator firing chamber.  These 
Lexan  plates  were  re-positioned  following  every 
shot  as  the  debris  from  the  fused  silica  window 
was  embedded  from  the  blast  into  the  surface  of 
the  Lexan  debris  shield.    Due  to  losses  from  the 
fiber coupling and lenses and transmission through 
a Lexan debris shield the power reaching the laser 
detonator  mount  inside  the  firing  chamber  was 
measured with a Coherent Laser Power Meter as a 
final transmitted power of 10.8 watts at 808.2 nm. 
Figure 7 at the end of this paper shows the optical 
test  bench  and  it  must  be  emphasized  that  the 
optical  delivery  system  was  a  free-space  air 
transport  beam  designed  to  test  a  wide  range  of 
explosives  and  fills  without  sacrificing  expensive 
fibers and internal ball lenses as would be found in 
an  optimized  laser  delivery  system  for  a  laser 
detonator.  This  optical  test  bench  was  created  to 
simply  use  a  common  platform  for  laser  light 
focused  to  an  800-micron  spot  size  1e2  at  a 
power density of approximately 2000 wattscm2 at 
the center of the fused silica window for testing a 
variety  of  doped  explosives  with  identical  laser 
beam and fluence characteristics.   
The  first  results  of  laser  initiation  of  HGN 
doped explosives show the viability of a secondary 
explosive  detonator  driven  by  a  low-power  laser 
source.  The  advantage  of 
initiation is the use of a safe secondary explosive 
the relatively high electrical efficiency of the laser 
diode and small size and the low electrical power 
requirements for the applications that this device is 
targeted towards.  Non-optimized laser energies of 
to  achieve  detonation 
130 millijoules were sufficient to initiate the gold 
nanoshell  doped  K-6  with  an  800m  spot  size  in 
times scales of  10 milliseconds using extremely 
short  initial  pressing  column  lengths  of  3  mm   
followed  by  a  wider  5  mm  diameter  layer  of  undoped K-6 that was pressed to a column length of 
2  mm.    In  experimenting  with  smaller  fills  of 
doped K-6 to determine the minimum mass of K-6 
diameter column that repeatedly detonated was 2.4 
mm  in  diameter  pressed  at  moderate  density  to  a 
column  length  of  3  mm  for  a  mass  of  20 
milligrams  of  doped  K-6  followed  by  a  50 
milligram  second  pressing  of  un-doped  K-6.    As 
mentioned previously a separate pressing die was 
used  to  more  carefully  control  the  density  and 
uniformity of the initial pressing. A high resolution 
SEM  image  of  the  ball-milled  HGNs  doped  K-6 
powder  is  shown  in  Figure  5  and  small  gold 
nanoshells  pepper  the  surface  of  a  single  crystal 
the  HGNs  are  visible  as  uniform  spheres  on 
surface of the crystal at this magnification.  
Figure 5. SEM of HGNs coating single K-6 crystal 
The force of the detonation of the final two mm of 
un-doped K-6 50 milligrams fired the small brass 
die  that  held  the  3  mm  20  milligrams  pellet  of 
nanoshell  doped  K-6  and  embedded  it  into  the 
Lexan  blast  shield  that  protects  the  focusing  lens 
for  the  optical  beam  delivery  system  swaged  the 
confinement cap as shown in figure 6 below.  
achieved here for repeatable DDT transition in 
these experiments are much shorter than those 
currently used primary explosives such as CP and 
this may be an indication of both the intimate heat 
transfer rate of nanoshells distributed the surface 
of the explosive crystals and the exothermic nature 
of K-6 in transitioning from a deflagration to a 
detonation.  This capability permit functional laser 
detonator designs with HE loads of as little as 70 
milligrams and only 20 milligrams of the special 
nanoshell doped K-6 initial pressing. Further 
ongoing work will continue not just with K-6 but 
also with the secondary explosive HMX as well 
although this will require a more conventional 
column length of many millimeters.  Ultimately 
we wish to realize a fast acting 1 ms fiber 
coupled laser DDT detonator in a compact design 
with minimal HE loads and to both model and 
understand the specific initiation physics of these 
rapid volumetrically heated HE samples by fibercoupled laser light using resonantly tuned 
nanoshells that are coating the surface of the 
crystals in the initial pressing explosive load.
Figure 6. Small 2.4mm Pellet Laser DDT with Die 
Conclusions on DDT of nanoshell doped K-6 
This work shows a viable approach to creating 
a very compact DDT detonator that is laser 
initiated with a simple diode laser based on the 
secondary explosive K-6 that is doped with a novel 
resonantly absorptive suspension of nanoshells at 
mass-fractions less than solvent contamination 
levels. These novel nanoshells are fabricated to 
have a customized absorption at the specific laser 
wavelength and are vacuum dried upon the surface 
of individual crystals.  The column lengths 
Table 1. HMX Laser Detonator shots with a 1000 Diameter Spot size 
Figure 7. Laser Illumination System to put 10 watts of 810-nm laser light onto Laser Detonator 
Table 2. Keto-RDX K-6 Laser Detonator shots with a 1000 Diameter Spot size 
Table 3. Keto-RDX K-6 Laser Detonator shots with an 800 Diameter Spot size 
The  author  wishes  to  acknowledge  the  help 
and  assistance  of  Constantine  Hrousis  Chadd 
May  Ralph  Hodgin  Dan  Phillips  Don  Hansen 
Jim Varosh and Jon Price in getting the material 
funding equipment and various discussions which 
fomented this research.1This work was performed 
under  the  auspices  of  the  U.S.  Department  of 
by  Lawrence  Livermore  National 
Laboratory under contract DE-AC52-07NA27344. 
Lawrence Livermore National Security LLC Small-Scale Safety and Thermal Testing of Improvised ExplosivesCorrelation of 
Results from a Multiple-Laboratory Proficiency Test 
John G. Reynoldsa Mary M. Sandstromb Geoffrey W. Brownb Kirstin F. Warnerc  
Jason J. Phillipsd Timothy J. Shelleye Jose A. Reyesf and Peter C. Hsua 
aLawrence Livermore National Laboratory LLNL Livermore CA 
bLos Alamos National Laboratory LANL Los Alamos NM 
cNaval Surface Warfare Center NSWC IHD Indian Head MD 
dSandia National Laboratories SNL Albuquerque NM 
eBureau of Alcohol Tobacco and Firearms BATF Redstone Arsenal Huntsville AL 
fApplied Research Associates ARA Tyndall AFB AFRL FL 
Abstract. Over 30 issues have been identified that indicate standard test methods may 
require modification when applied to home  made or improvised explosives HMEs to 
derive accurate sensitivity assessments by small-scale safety and thermal SSST testing.  
These results come from a round-robin type proficiency test conducted among five explosives  testing  laboratories  for  the  Integrated  Data  Collection  Analysis  IDCA  Program 
sponsored by the Department of Homeland Security. The participants had similar equipment usually differing by vintage.  This allowed determining how each participant performed on a specific material and how this performance differed from the average.  Some 
general trends observed for each series of tests include 1 Drop hammerLLNL usually 
found the materials less reactive than the average at low drop heights and LANL usually 
found  the  materials  less  reactive  than  the  average  at  high  drop  heights  2  Friction
LLNL  found  the  materials  less  sensitive  than  the  average  3  Electrostatic  discharge 
ESDNSWC IHD usually found the materials less sensitive than the average 4 Constant heating rate differential scanning calorimetry DSCvery reproducible for all the 
participants.  In addition the standard RDX was tested multiple times throughout the 
proficiency test by all the participants.  This provided a very large set of data to apply statistical analysis typical for this type of testing.  Application showed there were statistical 
differences among the performers due to sandpaper type impact operator and detection 
method  impact  friction  ESD  humidity  ESD  age  of  equipment  ESD  and  sample 
pan type DSC.  These results will be discussed in this report in terms of the how accu
rate are SSST testing data with respect to inter- and intra-laboratory testing.   
One of the first steps in establishing safe handling procedures for explosives is small-scale safety and thermal SSST testing.12 To better understand  the  response  of  home  made  or  improvised 
explosives HMEs to SSST testing 16 HME materials  were  compared  to  three  standard  military 
explosives in a proficiency-type round robin study 
among  five  laboratories  two  U.S.  Department  of 
Defense  and  three  U.S.  Department  of  Energy 
sponsored by the Department of Homeland Security Science  Technology Directorate Explosives 
Division. The testing matrix has been designed to 
address  problems  encountered  with  improvised 
materials  powder  mixtures  liquid  suspensions 
partially  wetted  solids  immiscible  liquids  and 
reactive  materials.    All  testing  materials  andor 
precursors came from the same batch distributed to 
each  of  the  participants  and  were  handled  pretreated and mixed by the standardized procedures.   
 Over 30 issues have been identified that indicate  standard  test  methods  may  require  modification when applied to HMEs to derive accurate sensitivity  assessments.34    The  recommendations  for 
modification  of  testing  are  1  develop  new  sampling  methods  that  guarantee  obtaining  a  representative sample particularly for very small samples of mixtures samples that have a volatile component  and  samples  that  have  large  mismatch  of 
particle sizes 2 carefully assess particle-size distributions of mixtures as particle size affects most 
measurements  3  recognize  that  safety  testing  is 
linked to the handling conditions so safety testing 
conditions must reflect the operation that is being 
assessed 4 recognize that relative sensitivity to a 
standard  can  change  when  testing  conditions  are 
altered  and  that  testing  may  not  reflect  the  true 
sensitivity of the material for specific application 
5 develop new methods to test liquids specifically  handling  the  volatility  issue  and  standards  6 
develop  instrument-based  detection  to  lessen  the 
reliance on observation. 
inter- and intra-laboratory testing.  
These results will be discussed in terms of the 
how accurate are SSST testing data with respect to 
The  experimental  methods  have  been  reviewed in detail elsewhere.56  Briefly the testing 
included  impact  Type  12  drop  hammer  friction 
German  Bundesanstalt  fr  Materialprfung
BAM  and  Allegany  Ballistics  LaboratoryABL 
methods  electrostatic  discharge  ESD  ABL  and 
custom  built  and  thermal  constant  heating  rate 
differential scanning calorimetryDSC.  All participating  laboratories  had  some  version  of  this 
suite of testing instruments. 
The  source  and  preparation  of  the  materials 
used  in  the  proficiency  test  have  also  been  reviewed previously.  All pretreatments and mixing 
followed IDCA procedures.67  Specifically drying 
was at 60C for 16 hours then the materials were 
cooled and stored in a desiccator.    
Table  1  shows  the  materials  studied  the  abbreviation found throughout the text and the physical  form.    The  variety  and  complexity  of  the 
forms  of  the  mixtures  and  compound  provided 
many challenges for testing. 
Table 1.  IDCA mixtures and pure materials 
ANBullseye gunpowder
RDX Type II Class 5l
a Mixture or pure material b observed physical form c activated charcoal Darco d icing sugar  -100 mesh KClO3 e icing 
sugar  as received KClO3 f ammonium nitrate g Urea nitrate h 
70 percent H2O2 i cuminum cyminum j 90 percent H2O2 k 
chappati l standard 
Generalized Comparison of Results among Participants 
The  five-laboratory  team  helps  answer  the 
question  are  there  differences  in  SSST  testing 
results among participants for a specific material?   
Impact sensitivity. Fig. 1 shows a graph of the 
impact data from the individual participants compared to the average of all the participants for each 
material.    The  values  are  the  DH50  in  cm  by  a 
modified  Bruceton  method8  load  for  50  percent 
probability of reaction.  The red line is the average 
data  and  the  symbols  are  Individual  laboratory 
The results in Fig. 134 are for the 0 to 50 cm 
range and show LLNL red circles values mostly 
are  above  the  average  line  for  sensitivities  below 
DH50 of 50 cm LANL blue squares values gen
1455
erally  are  below  the  average  line  for  sensitivities 
below DH50 of 50 cm IHD generally tracks LANL 
values but show slightly higher sensitivity AFRL 
values  generally  reports  the  highest  sensitivity  of 
the all the participants for a specific material.  The 
90 to 170 cm drop height range not shown indicates  LLNL  and  AFRL  are  below  the  average 
LANL  values  are  above  the  average  IHD  values 
do not exhibit a trend.  
Fig.  1.  Impact  sensitivity  data  by  modified 
Bruceton method DH50 in cm for the average of 
all participants vs. the average of each of the participants in range of 0 to 40 cm. 
Friction  sensitivity.    Friction  sensitivity  was 
measured  in  the  proficiency  test  by  testing  with 
BAM  and  ABL  equipment.    Friction  testing  results F50 are reported here with the BAM equipment.  F50 in kg is by a modified Bruceton method8  load  for  50  percent  probability  of  reaction.  
The red  line  is  the  average of  all  the data  in kg 
and the symbols are the individual lab data.  The 
results  for  the  ABL  equipment  will  be  reported 
below with a comparison analysis of these materials on both the ABL and BAM equipment. 
The  results  in  Fig.  2  show  LLNL  red  dots 
always  derives  a  value  for  F50  above  the  corresponding  average  value  for  each  of  the  materials 
except in one case LANL blue squares always 
derives  a  value  for  F50  below  the  corresponding 
average  value  for  each  of  the  materials  IHD 
green  diamonds  values  tend  to  be  around  the 
corresponding  average  values.  LLNL  finds  the 
materials to be less sensitive.  
Spark Sensitivity.  In the proficiency test two 
ESD systems were used the commercially available ABL system differing vintages and a custom 
built  system  by  LLNL.    Except  where  noted  all 
the data compared below were derived from comparable ABL systems.  Fig. 3 shows the data.  The 
red  line  is  the  average  data  and  the  symbols  are 
Individual laboratory data.   
Fig. 2.  Friction sensitivity by  modified Bruceton 
method  F50  in  kg  for  the  average  of  all  participants  vs.  the  average  of  each  of  the  participants 
taken on BAM testing equipment.   
Fig. 3. ESD sensitivity data TIL in J for the average  of  all  participants  vs.  the  average  of  each  of 
the participants taken on ABL testing equipment. 
The data are represented by TIL9 which is the 
load  joules  at  zero  reactions  out  of  20  or  fewer 
trials with at least one reaction out of 20 or fewer 
trials  at  the  next  higher  energy  level.    Individual 
data of each participant are represented vs. average 
data of all the participants 11 is red line.  LLNL 
red dots and AFRL black triangles have limited 
data  sets  with  the  ABL  device.    In  general  IHD 
green  diamonds  report  lower  sensitivities  compared to LANL blue squares.   
Comparison  of  BAM  Friction  and  ABL  Friction 
In the proficiency test friction sensitivity was 
measured  by  both  the  BAM  and  ABL  methods. 
Usually  a  testing  laboratory  has  one or  the  other 
instruments.    However  IHD  had  both  types  of 
equipment  allowing  for  a  direct  comparison  of 
both  types  of  data.    This  facilitated  an  answer  to 
the question is there a translation function between 
the two techniques?10  
The architectural designs of ABL friction and 
BAM friction testing equipment are vastly different and hence the response to the various HMEs is 
different. The ABL is more like a nip and BAM 
is  more  plow  like.    Fig.  4  compares  the  operational parameters of the two methods accentuating 
the  differences  in  the  mechanisms  by  which  the 
friction insults are applied.  
lated action so the response levels are in psig and 
kg respectively.    
Table 2 lists the average data for the F50 and 
TIL  determinations  by  the  ABL  and  BAM  methods.    Conditions  of  the  measurements  have  been 
reported elsewhere.10  The method for determining 
the average has been delineated previously.3   
Table  2.    F50  and  TIL  values  by  ABL  and  BAM 
1000  psig  is  upper  limit  for  ABL  method  36.7  kg  is  upper  limit  for  BAM 
ABL TIL psig F50 psig 
Fig. 4.  Diagrams of ABL and BAM Friction action during testing 
The ABL method has only hardened steel surfaces while the BAM method uses porous ceramics.    The  insult  point  for  the  ABL  method  is  a 
nipped  or  pinched  area  between  non-porous  two 
steel  surfaces.  While  for  the  BAM  method  the 
sample  is  plowed  over  a  porous  surface  with  the 
use  of  a  ceramic  peg.    In  both  cases  the support 
surface  moves  but  this  motion  is  different  in  the 
two  cases.    It  is  also  important  to  remember  that 
the  ABL  applies  force  using  pressure-regulated 
action and BAM applies force using weight regu
The  differences  in  design  of  the  two  methods 
are evident in some of the materials.  For example 
the  HPfuel  mixtures  exhibit  no  sensitivity  in  the 
ABL method but have various level of sensitivity 
by the BAM method.  The UNi mixtures show the 
opposite  trend  exhibiting  no  sensitivity  by  the 
BAM  method  but  reasonable  sensitivity  by  the 
The relative ordering of the F50 or TIL values 
of  the  sensitivities  of  the  materials  highlight  the 
differences  and  similarities  of  the  two  testing 
methods.  If the sensitivity of a specific material is 
compared relative to a well-characterized standard 
then the almost impossible task of comparing sensitivities in kg to sensitivities in psig at a specific 
velocity is somewhat overcome.  For TIL and F50 
for  the  two  methods  ABL  and  BAM  KCSugar 
and PETN are generally on the top of the list for 
friction sensitivity.    HMX  is  rated  relatively  less 
but still near the top of the list for relative sensitivity.    On  the  opposite  end  of  the  sensitivity  scale 
UNi  mixtures  tend  to  exhibit  little  or  no  friction 
sensitivity for both the methods. 
Many of the other materials exhibit one type of 
behavior for one method and the opposite behavior  for  the  other  method.    Examples  of  these  are 
KPAl KPC and SCSugar.  
Liquids and pastes tend to be less sensitive on 
the ABL method compared to the BAM with exception of HPNM mixture. This could be attributed to the miscibility of nitromethane in hydrogen 
Fig.  5.  Friction  sensitivity  by  TIL  assessment  by 
the ABL x-axis and the BAM y-axis methods 
into  subgroups  does  not  provide  any  correlations 
HMEs TIL R2  0.5372 F50 R2  0.16708.   
Comparison of Statistical Analysis of RDX  
In the proficiency test RDX Type II Class 5 
was used as the primary standard.  As a result the 
material  was  examined  several  times  throughout 
the testing.  This provides a significant amount of 
data on the same material to calculate some statistics that can help answer the question what is the 
margin  of  error  for  a  specific  determination  of 
RDX?  These values can be used as a basis for the 
margin  of  error  on  other  materials  that  statistics 
cannot  be  done  on  because  of  time  and  material 
Equivalency of RDX drop hammer DH50 data. Fig. 7 shows box plots11 of the impact data taken for RDX during the proficiency test.  The data 
are  grouped  by  participant  LLNL  LANL  IHD 
AFRL and SNL sandpaper type 180 is 180-grit 
garnet  150  is  150-grit  garnet  120  is  120-grit 
SiC  and  whether  the  data  were  reduced  by  the 
Bruceton8 or Neyer12 B or N respectively methods.  The colored boxes are 50 percent of each data 
set the mean is the center of the box the median 
is the line in the box and the range is the vertical 
bar.  The full sets of testing variables are sandpaper  striker  weight  temperature  humidity  detection method and operator.  The invariables are the 
source of the RDX all from the same batch the 
drying procedure7 and the mixing procedure.6   
Fig.  6.    Friction  sensitivity  by  F50  assessment  by 
ABL x-axis and the BAM y-axis methods 
In attempt to determine if there is a direct correlation between the two methods the TIL data for 
the  materials  are  shown  in  Fig.  5  and  for  the  F50 
data  in  Fig.  6.    In  both  figures  the  x-axis  represents  the  ABL  data  values  and  the  y-axis  represents the corresponding BAM data values.   
Clearly  there  is  no  correlation  of  the  data  between the two testing methods.  Dividing the data 
Fig. 7.  Box plot of the DH50 values grouped by 
participant sandpaper grit size and data reduction 
Visual  inspection  suggests  that  the  results 
range from symmetric to skewed and that a subset 
or subsets of the different groupings are likely in 
agreement with each other based on overlap of the 
shaded  regions  and  to  some  extent  the  maxmin 
bars.    The  AFRL  180  data  appears  to  be  significantly separated from the rest. 
Further analyses were conducted to verify statistically this observation AFRL 180 data is separated.  Analysis of variants or ANOVA1314 analysis  yielded  a  p-value  of  0.000  indicating  at  least 
one of the data sets represented in Fig. 7 is statistically different than the others and there is less than 
0.1 percent chance that this assessment is in error. 
Although the p-value indicates there is an outlier it does not indicate which one.  Further analysis  by  Tukey  and  Fisher  methods1315  allow  subgrouping to better identify the outlier.  The result 
of these subgrouping is discussed elsewhere11 but 
both methods show the AFRL 180 data set is categorized alone into a subgroup further substantiating the ANOVA results above.   
Further analyses data obtained during the proficiency  test  on  RDX11  show  for  DH50  the  expected results are a mean value of 21.5 cm with a 
27  percent  variability  and  for  BAM  F50  a  mean 
value of 21.0 kg and a 40 percent variability.  
Correlations with testing variables.  In SSST 
testing  the  environmental  variables  are  often  attributed for the differences in results on the same 
material.  As a partial test of this theory the RDX 
results were parameterized with a limited number 
of obvious variables.   
Fig. 8 shows the impact data DH50 in cm as 
a  function  of  sandpaper  type  noted  as  grit  size 
testing  room  temperature  testing  room  relative 
humidity  and  striker  mass.    Other  than  possible 
sandpaper effects the graphs offer no correlations.   
Fig. 9 shows a similar examination of the results  obtain  using  the  BAM  friction  instrument 
using  a  modified  Bruceton  F50  in  kg  or  the 
threshold  initiation  level  TIL  in  kg  analysis 
methods for testing room temperature and testing 
room relative humidity.  There is a possible correlation  with  humidity  for  the  F50  data  from  IHD 
Many comparisons have been reported on the 
effect  of  sandpaper  on  impact  sensitivity.3    As 
well studies on the role of grit on non-shock initiated  reactions indicate  that  grit  size  and  hardness 
are  important  parameters  for  initiation.17    Further 
work  has  been  conducted  on  determining  the  extent of the sandpaper effect by varying particle size 
of the energetic material and the grit size and composition  of  the  sandpaper.16    No  further  work  on 
determining the relationship of humidity to BAM 
and ABL friction measurements is planned. 
Fig. 8. Comparison of RDX Class 5 Type II DH50 
with various method and environment variables 
Fig. 9.  Comparison of RDX Class 5 Type II F50 
and  TIL  with  various  method  and  environment 
ESD  threshold  values.   ESD  provides  coarse 
data because of the ways the energy levels are set 
each  participant  sets  discrete  levels  differently.  
This  presents  many  repetitive  values  and  clustering  but  ANOVA  analysis  cannot  be  applied  so 
this data set is handled differently than above.    
Fig. 10 shows the ESD data sets determined as 
TIL  and  the  level  above  TIL  TIL  at  least  one 
positive out of 10 or 20 trials.  The data from IHD 
do  not  overlap  with  the  data  from  LLNL  and 
LANL.  This has been attributed to the much higher  amount  of  humidity  at  IHD  compared  to  the 
other testing laboratories.  The TIL range is 0.025 
to  0.095  J  average  0.046  J  with  a    50  percent 
variability.    The  TIL range  is  0.0625  to 0.165 J 
with  an  average  of  0.091J  and  a  variability  that 
cannot be calculated because some results fall outside of experimental range.   
Fig. 10.  Average TIL and TIL values for RDX 
Class 5 Type II ESD results.  LLNL results using 
the  custom  instrument  with  a  510-  resistor  are 
Thermal  data  for  RDX.    Thermal  sensitivity 
was measured by differential scanning calorimetry 
DSC  during  the  proficiency  test.    The  default 
conditions  were  a  10Cmin  heating  rate  TA  Instruments  pinhole  vented  sample  holder  and  approximately 40 to 500C heating range.   
For RDX the proficiency test yielded 46 different  data  sets  with  3  different  sample  holder 
types 2 sealed and 1 open.  Fig. 11 shows a comparison of the RDX examined in the standard sam
ple holder and a specialized high pressure SWISSI 
Fig. 11.   Example DSC scans of RDX Class 5 
Type II in typical pinhole hermetic pans blue 
lines and one type of sealed pan green Lines. 
The  details  of  the  comparison  of  the  sample 
holders  can  be  found  elsewhere.511    The  results 
show  the  measurements  with  the  sealed  sample 
holders  indicate  higher  enthalpies  of  decomposition because they do not allow gas to escape during  heating.    For  example  the  exothermic  broad 
maximum in Fig. 11 is around 4000 Jg and 2000 
Jg  for  the  SWISSI  and  pinhole  sample  holders 
respectively.    The  pinhole  sample  holders  allow 
gas to escape at a controlled rate that removes heat 
from  the  system  lowering  the  total  observed  enthalpy.    This  also  affects  the  maximum  or  minimum temperatures of these features but to a lesser 
extent.  For example the Tmax range of the broad 
exothermic feature in Fig. 11 is 237 to 242 C and 
239  to  244  C  for  SWISSI  and  pinhole  sample 
holders respectively.  
Generalized Comparison of Results Among Participants 
The  IDCA  found  when  applying  standard 
SSST testing techniques to HMEs modification of 
procedures  might  be  required  before  meaningful 
data can be derived.  Below are results from testing  a  specific  material  or  materials  that  can  be 
generalized  to  issues  that  need  consideration  before testing any HME.   
  Pure  solidssandpaper  selection  can  affect  impact sensitivity results so grit size sample preparation and particle size must be considered 
 Solid-solid mixturessame sandpaper issues for 
impact  sensitivity  in  addition  obtaining  a  representative  sample  and  particle  size  mismatch  have 
to  be  considered  in  determining  reactivity  in  all 
tests especially DSC 
 Solid-liquid mixturesvolatility of components 
solid particle issues and obtaining a representative 
sample must be considered for all tests 
 Liquid-liquid mixturesvolatility of components 
and mixing are important considerations in obtaining a representative sample for all tests 
  Relative  sensitivity  compared  to  standards
sandpaper  affects  both  sample  and  standard  but 
not  necessarily  the  same  way  something  can  be 
sensitive  with  one  sandpaper  and  not  sensitive 
with another in impact testing 
 Absolute sensitivityoperator subjectivity testing environment and choice of testing parameters 
can affect the absolute sensitivity that can question 
the authenticity of the absolute number 
  Specific  casescertain  materials  have  shown 
that SSST testing may not be possible because of 
the physical nature of the material. 
Comparison  of  Statistical  Analysis  of  RDX  Results 
The RDX standard was tested multiple times 
during  the  proficiency  test  by  all  the  participants 
yielded  enough  data  to  make  set  expectations  of 
future results based on statistical analysis.  Table 3 
shows  these  expected  results  and  variation  for 
RDX for all the SSST testing.  The table also includes  suggested  sources  for  the  variation  both 
environmental and other.  A full discussion of the 
results can be found elsewhere.11    
Table 3.  Ranges of DSC Parameters for RDX Class 5 Type II 
Endothermic Minimum C 
Endothermic Onset C 
Endothermic Minimum C 
Endothermic Enthalpy Jg 
Exothermic Maximum C 
Exothermic Enthalpy Jg 
1. Onset is the beginning of the maximum or minimum as automatically identified by the equipment endothermic min. is the minimum temperature of 
the endothermic feature endothermic enthalpy is the overall enthalpy of the two overlapping endothermic features exothermic max. is the maximum 
of the exothermic feature 2. Range only because the transition between the endothermic and exothermic features overlap 3.  Two values from IHD Set 
2 discarded due to sample holder rupturing during experiment 
The  conclusions  from  the  analysis  of  results 
from  the  IDCA  proficiency  test  are  best  understood by listing some general recommendations for 
HME  testing.    These  recommendations  are  the 
  Develop  new  sampling  methods  that  guarantee 
obtaining  a  representative  sample  particularly  for 
very small samples of mixtures samples that have 
volatile  components  and  samples  that  have  large 
mismatch of particle sizes 
  Carefully  assess  particle-size  distributions  of 
mixtures  as  particle  size  affects  most  measurements 
  Recognize  that  relative  sensitivity  to  a  standard 
can  change  when  testing  conditions  are  altered 
because the standard may behave differently to the 
altered conditions than the target material 
 Recognize that SSST testing may not reflect the 
true sensitivity of the material for a specific appli
1461
cation because of the dependency of the results on 
experimental configuration 
 Develop new methods to test liquids specifically 
dealing  with  volatility  issues  and  development  of 
an appropriate liquid standard 
  Develop  instrument-based  detection  to  lesson 
reliance on observation. 
Although further research to advance a better 
understanding  of  SSST  testing  on  a  fundamental 
level  is  slow  in  being  funded  efforts  to  better 
standardize testing procedures are being forwarded 
by  the  Explosives  Testers  User  Group  organized 
by  Safety  Management  Services  which  is  an  organization  that  includes  many  different  energetic 
materials testing laboratories.18    Measurements of Detonation Properties of Aluminized Emulsion Explosive 
Yukio Kato Kenji Murata Noriyuki Kaga and Kenji Tanaka
2-1 Dobu Nagasaka Nishigo-mura Nishishirakawa-gun Fukushima-ken 961-8686 Japan 
Nippon Koki Co. Ltd. 
61-1 Kitakomatsudani Taketoyo-cho Chita-gun Aichi-ken 470-2398 Japan
Abstract.  Detonation  velocity  and  pressure  of  emulsion  explosives  EMX  loaded  with 
10 to 40 wt. of 5.7 Pm size aluminum Al particle were measured and compared with 
those  of  aluminized  nitromethane  NM  to  study  the  effect  of  the  addition  of  Al  .  The 
measured  detonation  velocity  of  aluminized  EMX  was  strongly  dependent  on  charge 
diameter.  The  reaction  zone  length  of  aluminized  EMX  was  largely  extended  for  Al 
fraction higher than 30 wt. while that of aluminized NM was not changed in Al fraction 
range up to 45 wt.. The velocity deficit of aluminized EMX increased with the increase 
of  Al  content.  The  measured  pressure-time  profile  of  aluminized  EMX  did  not  indicate 
the  effect  of  the  energy  release  by  Al  reaction.  The  ignition  delay  of  Al  reaction  was 
estimated  to  be  very  long  for  aluminized  EMX  because  of  low  detonation  temperature. 
The  pressure  increase  due  to  the  energy  release  by  Al  reaction  was  observed  in  Taylor 
waves  at  23  Ps  behind  detonation  front  for  aluminized  NM.  The  results  of  pressure 
measurements showed that the reaction of Al particle depends strongly on the temperature 
of gaseous detonation products. 
Emulsion  explosive  EMX  has  been  widely 
used  in  a  variety  of  blasting  applications  because 
of its safety in handling high performance and low 
cost.  Detonation  properties  of  EMX  can  be 
controlled by the selection of size and quantity of 
void.  During  last  decades  a  large  number  of 
studies  12  have  been  performed  to  investigate  the 
effect  of  void  size  and  quantity  on  detonation 
velocity  critical  diameter  and  sensitivity  etc.  of 
EMX.  Aluminum  Al  has  been  used  to  improve 
the blasting performance of EMX. However there 
are  few  fundamental  studies  on  the  effect  of  the 
addition of Al particle to the performance of EMX. 
Lefrancois  et  al.3  performed  the  measurements  of 
the  detonation  temperature  and  pressure  of  EMX 
loaded  with  7  or  14  wt.  Al  particle.  Mendes  et 
al.4 measured the detonation velocity and pressure 
of EMX containing 10 to 30 wt. of 6 um size Al 
particle. Kato et al.5 investigated the effect of size 
and  content  of  Al  powder  on  the  underwater 
explosion performance of aluminized EMX. 
In  this  study  the  detonation  velocity  and 
pressure  of  aluminized  EMX  were  measured  and 
compared  with  those  of  aluminized  nitromethane 
NM  to  study  the  effect  of  the  addition  of  Al 
particle.  EMX  is  typical  non-ideal  explosive  with 
long  reaction  zone  longer  than  1  Ps1  and  its 
detonation  velocity  is  strongly  dependent  on 
charge  diameter  and  confinement.  Contrary  NM 
has  short  reaction  zone  about  50  ns6  and  its 
detonation velocity changes very little with charge 
diameter  and  confinement.  The  reaction  of  Al 
particle  in  detonation  products  of  two  different 
type of explosives were investigated.
The  formulation  of  emulsion  matrix  was 
ammonium  nitratesodium  nitratewaterwax  and 
emulsifier  78.54.811.35.4  in  weight  ratio.  The 
emulsion  matrix  was  oxygen  balanced  and  its 
density  was  1390  kgm3.  The  initial  density  of 
EMX  was  adjusted  to  1210  kgm3  by  adding 
mono-cell type plastic balloon of average diameter 
53 Pm  to  emulsion  matrix. Al  powder with  mean 
particle size of 5.7 Pm was used. The Al content of 
aluminized EMX was changed from 10 wt. to 40 
wt..  For  detonation  velocity  measurements 
sample explosives were confined in steel tubes of 
different  inner  diameter  12.7  16.2  21.2  and  38.7 
mm  250  mm  in  length  and  5.1  mm  thick. 
Detonation  velocity  was  measured  by  4  optical 
fiber probes placed at 50 mm interval. First probe 
was set at 90 mm from booster explosive to assure 
propagation.  Detonation 
pressure  was  measured  using  PVDF  pressure 
gauge. Fig. 1 shows the experimental arrangement 
for  detonation  pressure  measurements.  The  detail 
of  PVDF  pressure  gauge  was  explained  in  the 
contained in steel tube of inner diameter 38.7 mm 
150  mm  long  and  5.1  mm  thick  for  detonation 
pressure measurements.
Results and Discussion 
The  relation  between  detonation  velocity  and 
reciprocal of charge diameter is presented in Fig. 2 
for  base  EMX  and  aluminized  EMXs.  Measured 
detonation  velocity  is  shown  to  decrease  linearly 
with the increase of reciprocal of charge diameter. 
The  charge  diameter  effect  of  detonation  velocity 
becomes  considerably  important  at  Al  content 
higher  than  30  wt.  and  detonation  fails  to 
propagate  at  smallest  charge  diameter  when  Al 
content is 40 wt..  
In this study only confined charges were used 
because  in  the  case  of  unconfined  charges  the 
velocity  deficit  was  too  large  to  obtain  linear 
relation between detonation velocity and reciprocal 
of  charge  diameter.  Shock  velocity  of  confining 
steel tube is about 5000 ms at pressure of 10 GPa 
and very close to detonation velocity of base EMX 
and  aluminized  EMXs.  When  detonation  velocity 
Fig.1. Experimental arrangement for detonation 
pressure measurements. 
Fig.2. Relationship between detonation velocity 
and reciprocal charge diameter for aluminized 
is  lower  than  4600  ms  precursor  shock  wave  in 
steel  tube  is  estimated  to  propagate  ahead  of 
detonation  front.  However 
precursor  shock  wave  in  steel  tube  on  detonation 
propagation  was  not  observed  in  the  results  of 
detonation velocity measurements.   
The  charge  diameter  effect  is  expressed  by 
Where  Dd  and  Di  are  respectively  detonation  at 
charge diameter d and infinite diameter and A is a 
fitting  parameter.  The  A  value  does  not  represent 
real reaction zone length but it is considered to be 
correlated  with  reaction  zone  length  when  it  is 
obtained under the same conditions. The results of 
detonation  velocity  measurements  of  aluminized 
EMXs are summarized in Table 1. The A value is 
almost  constant  up  to  Al  content  20  wt.  and 
increases  considerably  from  Al  content  30  to  40 
wt..  These  results  indicate  that  reaction  zone 
length of EMX is almost constant up to Al fraction 
20 wt. and largely extended when Al content is 
higher  than  30  wt..  The  reaction  zone  length of 
aluminized EMX loaded with 30 or 40 wt. of Al 
particle is estimated to be respectively 50  longer 
or 3 times longer than that of base EMX. 
Fig.  3  shows  the  relation  between  detonation 
velocity  and  reciprocal  of  charge  diameter  for 
aluminized NM loaded with 545 wt. of 10 and 
16  Pm  size  Al  particle  Ref.  78.  Detonation 
velocity of NM loaded with 515 wt. of 10 Pm
size Al particle was measured using thin brass tube 
and that of NM loaded with 30 and 45 wt. of 16 
Pm size Al particle was measured using PVC tube. 
Table 1. Detonation velocities of aluminized 
Fig.3. Relation between detonation velocity 
and reciprocal charge diameter for aluminized 
Fig.4. Effect of aluminum content on detonation 
velocity of aluminized EMX. 
the  effect  of  the  energy  release  by  Al  reaction  is 
For aluminized EMX loaded with 40 wt. of 
Al the pressure of leading shock wave is lowered 
to  7.5  GPa  and  pressure  continues  to  increase  in 
reaction zone. The measured reaction length is 1.8 
times longer than that of base EMX. The pressure 
at  the  end  of  reaction  zone  is  9  GPa.  The  rate  of 
pressure  decay  in  Taylor  rarefaction  waves  is 
much lower than that of base EMX because a large 
amount of EMX reacts in Taylor rarefaction waves. 
The  effect of  the energy  release by Al reaction  is 
not observed neither in reaction zone nor in Taylor 
rarefaction waves.  
According  to  the  results  of  calculation  by 
KHT code supposing Al inert the CJ temperatures 
To  prepare  aluminized  NM  NM  was 
thickened  by  addition  of  3  wt.  of  PMMA  as 
gelling agent. For aluminized NM the A value is 
almost constant in Al fraction range up to 45 wt. 
suggesting that the reaction zone length of NM is 
not changed by the addition of Al particle. 
The variation of Di and Dd d38.7 mm with 
Al  content  is  presented  in  Fig.  4  for  aluminized 
EMXs.  Detonation  velocities  calculated  using 
KHT  thermochemical  code  supposing  Al  reactive 
and  inert  are  also  presented  for  comparison. 
Detonation  velocity  at  infinite  charge  diameter 
agrees  well  with  calculated  detonation  velocity 
supposing Al inert.  
For  detonation  velocity  measured  at  charge 
diameter  38.7  mm  velocity  deficit  becomes  very 
large when Al content is higher than 30 wt. even 
with  thick  steel    confinement.  According  to  the 
results of Hirosaki et al.1 about 90  of explosive 
is reacted in the reaction zone of base EMX. The 
results  of  detonation  velocity  measurements  at 
charge  diameter  38.7  mm  indicate  that  large 
amount  of  explosive 
rarefaction  waves  for  aluminized  EMXs  with  Al 
content higher than 30 wt.. 
Fig.  5  shows  pressure-time  profiles  of 
in  base  and  aluminized  EMXs 
measured  using  PVDF  pressure  gauge.  As  PVDF 
pressure  gauge  measured  detonation  pressure 
transmitted into PMMA plate detonation pressure 
was  calculated  by  impedance  match  method.  The 
results  of  pressure  measurements  of  Aluminized 
EMXs  are  summarized  in  Table  2  with  the 
measured reaction zone length Lexp and calculated 
reaction  zone  length  Lcal.  Lcal  is  calculated  by 
ADd  d38.7  mm.  In  the  case  of  detonation  in 
base  EMX  Neumann  spike  steep  pressure 
decrease  in  reaction  zone  and  following  pressure 
decay  in  Taylor  rarefaction  waves  are  observed. 
The  measured  detonation  pressure  of  10.4  GPa  is 
in  good  agreement  with  CJ  pressure  of  11.8  GPa 
calculated using KHT thermochemical code.  
Pressure-time  profile  of  aluminized  EMX 
loaded with 20 wt. of Al is very similar to that of 
base EMX except that Neumann spike pressure is 
lower  and  reaction  zone  length  is  about  20   
longer.  The  rate  of  pressure  decay  in  Taylor 
rarefaction  waves  of  aluminized  EMX  containing 
20 wt. of Al is similar to that of base EMX and 
Fig.5. Pressure-time profile of detonation in 
EMX and aluminized EMX. cid1035 indicates 
the end of reaction zine. 
Table 2. Detonation pressure of aluminized 
cid3 cid3 cid3 cid3 cid3 cid3
of  aluminized  EMX  loaded  with  20  and  40  wt. 
are respectively 235 and 490 K lower than that of 
base  EMX.  The  ignition  delay  of  Al  reaction  is 
estimated to become considerably longer with the 
increase of Al content. 
The  measured  pressure-time  profiles  of 
detonation  in NM  and  aluminized NM  containing 
Al particle of 5.7 Pm size are shown in Fig. 6. For 
aluminized  NM  loaded  with  30  wt.  of  Al  Al 
particle  is  suspended  in  gelled  NM  and  for 
aluminized NM loaded with 60 wt. of Al packed 
beds of Al particle is saturated by  NM.  
In the case of NM detonation pressure profile 
in the reaction zone behind leading shock wave is 
not resolved because of very short reaction zone6.
The abrupt change of pressure gradient at the end 
of  reaction  zone  and  following  pressure  decay  in 
Taylor  rarefaction  waves  are  observed.  The 
measured  detonation  pressure  of  12.5  GPa  is  in 
good  agreement  with  CJ  pressure  of  11.8  GPa 
calculated by KHT code.  
pressure  increase  due  to  the  energy  release  by  Al 
Fig.6. Pressure-time profiles of detonation in 
NM and aluminized NM. 
detonation  front  and  this  pressure  increase  is 
strongly  dependent  on  Al  content.  The  rate  of  Al 
reaction  in  gaseous  detonation  products  of  NM  is 
considered to be strongly dependent on Al content.  
measurements the ignition delay of Al reaction is 
estimated to be shorter than 0.2 Ps for aluminized 
NM  Ref.  9.  The  CJ  temperatures  of  NM  and 
EMX  are  respectively  in  the  range  of  34003800 
K  and  20002400  K.  The  results  of  pressure 
measurements  indicate  that  the  reaction  of  Al 
particle  depends  strongly  on  the  temperature  of 
gaseous detonation products.  
The  measured  pressure-time  profiles  of 
aluminized  NM  show  the  extended  high  pressure 
zone  behind  leading  shock  wave  which  is  due  to 
complex wave interactions between multiple shock 
reflections in Al particles and detonation waves in 
NM.  Milne10  and  Ripley  et  al.11  performed 
mesoscale simulation of detonation propagation in 
packed beds of Al particle saturated with NM and 
demonstrated  the  existence  of  this  extended  high 
aluminized  EMX  were  measured  and  compared 
with those of aluminized NM to study the effect of 
the addition of Al particle.  
aluminized  EMX  was  strongly  dependent  on 
charge diameter. The velocity deficit of aluminized 
EMX  increased  considerably  with  the  increase  of 
Al content. The reaction zone length of aluminized 
EMX  was  largely  extended  for  Al  content  higher 
than  30  wt.  while  that  of  aluminized  NM  was 
not changed in the Al content range up to 45 wt..  
The  measured  pressure-time  profile  of 
aluminized  EMX  did  not  show  the  effect  of  the 
energy  release  by  Al  reaction.  The  ignition  delay 
of  Al  reaction  was  estimated  to  be  very  long  for 
aluminized  EMX  because  of 
temperature  while  that  of  aluminized  NM  was 
shorter  than  0.2  Ps.  For  aluminized  NM  the 
pressure  increase  due  to  the  energy  release  by  Al 
reaction was observed in Taylor rarefaction waves 
at  23  Ps  behind  detonation  front.  The  results  of 
pressure  measurements  showed  that  Al  reaction 
depends  strongly  on  the  temperature  of  gaseous 
detonation products. 
Particles Proceedings of the 6th Detonation 
Symposium pp. 124-132 Coronado CA August 
9. Kato Y. Murata K. and Kaga N. Aluminun 
NitromethaneAluminum  Mixtures  presented  in 
10. Milne  A.  M.  Detonation  in  Heterogeneous 
Mixtures  of  Liquids  and  Particles  Shock  Waves 
Vol. 10 pp. 351-62 2000. 
11. Ripley  R.  C.  Zhang  F.  and  Lien  F.  S. 
Detonation  Interaction  with  Metal  Particles  in 
Explosives  Proceedings  of  the  13th  Detonation 
Symposium pp. 214-223 Norfolk VA July 2006. Synthesis and Thermal Stability of the Novel Explosive Materials  
BNFF BNFF-1 and ANFF-1 
Roman Tsyshevsky1 Philip Pagoria2 and Maija M. Kuklja1  
1 Materials Science and Engineering Department University of Maryland College Park MD 20742 
2 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 7000 East Street Livermore CA 94550 
Abstract.  We  report  synthesis  and  modeling  of  new  energetic  compounds  34-Bis4nitro-125-oxadiazol-3-yl-125-oxadiazole-1-oxide 
34-bis4-nitro-125oxadiazol-3-yl-125-oxadiazole  BNFF-1  and  3-4-amino-125-oxadiazol-3-yl-4-4nitro-125-oxadiazol-3-yl-125-oxadiazole  ANFF-1.  Density  functional  theory  based 
calculations are used to refine the molecular structure of the novel compounds. Modeling 
of activation barriers and reaction rate constants for main decomposition channels in the 
gas phase indicates that these new materials are likely to have a relatively low sensitivity 
to initiation of detonation. However their thermal stability and decomposition scenarios 
differ from traditional nitro-arenes. 
Nitro-substituted  multi-cyclic  heterocyles 
34-Bis4-nitro-125-oxadiazol-3-yl125-oxadiazole-2-oxide  DNTF  BNFF  which 
was first reported in 200212 are of interest as next 
generation  energetic  compounds.  Their  good 
thermal  stability  the  low  melting  point  110  C 
sensitivity  make  these  multi-cyclic  heterocycles 
Figure 1 attractive candidate materials for the use 
as  secondary  explosives34567891011  oxidizers  in 
rocket  propellant  formulations7  and  possibly  as 
melt-castable explosive detonator materials12. 
properties  of  BNFF  it  was  reasoned  that  the 
furazan  analog  34-Bis4-nitro-125-oxadiazol-3yl-125-oxadiazole  BNFF-1  would  be  also  an 
interesting target molecule. Indeed BNFF-1 has a 
melting point of 85 C and a DSC exotherm peak 
Intriguingly  3-4-amino-125oxadiazol-3-yl-4-4-nitro-125-oxadiazol-3-yl125-oxadiazole  ANFF-1  also  has  a  fairly  low 
melting point of 100 C despite the possibility of 
increased intermolecular hydrogen bonding. Their 
low melting temperatures coupled with their good 
stability in the melt make these materials attractive 
as melt-castable explosives.   
In this article aimed at analyzing the structure 
and  bond  strengths  of  these  new  molecules  we 
present the synthesis procedure combined with the 
theoretical  modeling  of 
channels  of  the  BNFF-1  and  ANFF-1  gas-phase 
molecules. We compare the reactivity of BNFF-1 
and  ANFF-1  with  various  known  explosive 
compounds  in  terms  of  calculated  Arrhenius 
parameters and available experimental data. 
Computational details 
Decomposition  reactions  in  gas-phase  were 
studied  within  density  functional  theory  DFT 
with  GGA-PBE  and  M06 
the  GAUSSIAN  code13.  All 
molecular  calculations  were  performed  by  using 
double-zeta cc-pVDZ basis set.  
surface  calculations  were 
performed  in  the  GGA  approximation  with  the 
PBE  exchange  correlation  functional  and  PAW 
pseudo-potentials  as  implemented  in  the  plane 
wave  VASP  code141516.  In  simulating  an  ideal 
BNFF crystal we used 322 MonkhorstPack kpoint mesh and the kinetic energy cut-off was set 
to  800  eV.  Atomic  coordinates  and 
constants  were  allowed  to  simultaneously  relax 
convergence  criterion for  electronic  steps was  set 
to 10-4 eV and the maximum force acting on any 
atom was set not to exceed 0.02 eV.  
Surface  reactions  were  simulated  in  a  slab 
model  in  which  the  supercell  consisted  of  the 
three-molecule-thick surface layer cut out to create 
the  001  surfaces.  A  vacuum  layer  of  10    and 
the large size of the supercell ensured that spurious 
interactions  between 
products  in  neighbor  cells  are  minimal.  Surface 
supercell calculations we performed at the Gamma 
point  only  with  kinetic  energy  cut-off  set  to  600 
eV.  The  convergence  criteria  for  electronic  and 
ionic  steps  were  set  to  10-4  eV  and  0.03  eV 
Minimal  energy  paths  in  the  VASP  periodic 
calculations were obtained with the nudged elastic 
band method with six intermediate images. Atomic 
positions  were  relaxed  using  conjugate  gradient 
and  quasi-Newtonian  methods  within  a  force 
tolerance of 0.05 eV.   
Reaction  rates  were  calculated  by  applying 
transition  state  theory  TST  for  reactions  with 
well-defined  transition  states  and  variational  TST 
for  reactions  with  no  barriers  as  described 
BNFF.  Into  a  1L  3-necked  round-bottomed 
flask  equipped  with  a  thermometer  dropping 
funnel  stir  bar  and  drying  tube  was  added  34- 
Bis4-amino-125-oxadiazol-3-yl-125oxadiazole-1-oxide 
trifluoroacetic  acid  265  mL  to  form  a  slurry. 
With  stirring 70  H2O2  25  mL  23g 0.67  mol 
was added dropwise at 21 C with external cooling 
oxidation is slightly exothermic.  The mixture was 
temperature  water  bath. 
Fig. 1. Molecular structures of BNFF BNFF-1 and 
Fig. 2. Schematic representation of decomposition 
mechanisms of BNFF based molecules.  
allowed to stir at room temp overnight. A solution 
formed and the mixture turned a blue-green color 
and  then  cleared  to  a  light  yellow  solution.  The 
reaction mixture was poured into ice water 1.2 L 
and  the  mixture  was  allowed  to  stir  2h.  The 
precipitate  was  collected  by  suction  filtration 
washed  with  ice  water  and  allowed  to  dry  under 
suction Yield 8-9g 64-72 13C-NMR acetoned6  104.36 138.085 140.448 143.739 160.714 
ppm  IR  KBr  1640  1585  1515  1448  1355 
1317 1190 1039 1000 961 907 831 805 cm-1 
Mass Spec. 312 gmole. 
BNFF-1. Procedure 1 Into a 1 Liter 3-necked 
thermometer  stir  bar  and  addition  funnel  was 
placed trifluoroacetic acid 350 mL and 34-Bis4amino-125-oxadiazol-3-yl-125-oxadiazole 
10g  0.04  mol.  With  stirring  the  solution  is 
cooled  to  20  C  with  an  ice  bath  and  70 
hydrogen  peroxide  35  mL  19.5g  0.57  mol  is 
added dropwise. Little or no exotherm occurs upon 
addition. The mixture is allowed to warm to room 
temperature and stir overnight. Upon warming the 
mixture  turns  a  blue-green  color.  After  about  5 
hours  a  clear  yellow  solution  forms  although  in 
some cases a small amount of a yellow precipitate 
is  present.    The  yellow precipitate  is  removed  by 
filtration  through  a  glass  fiber  filter  paper  into  a 
flask containing ice water 1.1 L and stirred one 
hour. Initially a milky white suspension forms but 
the  BNFF-1  slowly  solidifies  upon  stirring.    The 
solid is collected by suction filtration washed with 
water  and  allowed  to  suction  dry  to  yield  a  light 
yellow  powder  8.3g  67.  Recrystallization  of 
formic acid water yields white microcrystals m.p. 
85 C 13C-NMR acetone-d6  140.031 143.030 
160.993 ppm Mass Spec 236 gmol. BNFF-1 may 
be  purified  by  sublimation  at  70  C  under  high 
vacuum to yield BNFF-1 as white microcrystals.  
Procedure 2 Into a 300 mL 3-necked roundbottomed flask equipped with a thermometer stir 
bar  and  addition  funnel  was  placed  concentrated 
96 sulfuric acid 100 mL and 34-bis4-amino125-oxadiazol-3-yl-125-oxadiazole 
mmol.  The  mixture  is  stirred  until  a  solution  is 
realized.  With  stirring  the  solution  is  cooled  to 
10  C  with  an  ice  water  bath  and  50-70 
hydrogen  peroxide  20-30  mL  10-12  fold  molar 
excess of H2O2 530 mmol is added dropwise at 
  20  C.  The  mixture 
is  stirred  at  room 
temperature  and  stirred  5-  18h.  Reaction 
complete when the solution turns from blue-green 
to  light  yellow.  The  mixture  turns  a  blue-green 
color  after  an  hour  and  a  white  to  light  blue 
dissipated  the  light  blue  to  colorless  slurry  is 
poured into ice water 500 mL with stirring.  The 
solid is collected by suction filtration washed with 
water and allowed to suction dry to yield a white 
Recrystallization  of  formic  acid  water  yields 
white  microcrystals  m.p.  85  C 
acetone-d6  140.031 143.030 160.993 ppm.   
light  blue  powder 
ANFF-1.  The  method  of  choice  for  the 
synthesis of ANFF-1 involves the partial oxidation 
34-bis4-amino-125-oxadiazol-3-yl-125of 
oxadiazole  with  35  H2O2 
H2SO4.20 Into a 300 mL 3-necked round-bottomed 
flask  equipped  with  a  thermometer  stir  bar  and 
addition  funnel  was  placed  concentrated  96 
sulfuric acid 200 mL and 34-bis4-amino-125oxadiazol-3-yl-125-oxadiazole  20g  84  mmol. 
The  mixture  is  stirred until  a  solution  is  realized. 
With stirring the solution is cooled to 10 C with 
an ice water bath and 35 hydrogen peroxide 2030 mL 8 fold molar excess of H2O2 530 mmol 
is added dropwise at  20 C. The mixture turns a 
blue-green color after an hour BNFF-1 forms as a 
light blue-green precipitate.  The mixture is stirred 
at 18-23 oC for 3h.  The reaction mixture is filtered 
through  a  glass  fritted  Buchner  funnel  to  remove 
the  insoluble  BNFF-1  into  2  liters  of  ice  water 
resulting  in  precipitation  of  ANFF-1  as  a  white 
solid.  The  precipitate  ANFF-1  is  collected  by 
suction filtration washed with water and allowed 
to  air  dry  to  yield  10.5g  45  of  a  white  solid.  
Recrystallization from CHCl3 insoluble 4-amino125-oxadiazol-3-yl-125-oxadiazole  is  removed 
by  gravity  filtration  yields  ANFF-1  as  white 
needles m.p. 100 C 1H-NMR DMSO-d6  6.72 
s  H  6.58  s  2H  13C-NMR  DMSO-d6   
160.06  155.42  144.25  140.92  139.23  135.69 
Modeling Decomposition Reactions 
Thermal  stability  of  the  BNFF  BNFF-1  and 
ANFF-1  molecules  was 
modeling  of  four  most  plausible  decomposition 
mechanisms21  Fig. 2  1  the  homolytic  cleavage 
of the C-N bond leading to NO2 loss 2 the nitronitrite  rearrangement  CONO-isomer  formation 
proceeding  via  a  pseudo  rotation  of  the  nitro 
group 3 the concerted cleavage of the central ring 
and 4 the concerted cleavage of the outer ring. 
The  calculated  activation  barriers  reaction  rates 
and pre-exponential factors are collected in Table 
1.  The  Arrhenius  parameters  Table  1  and 
reaction rates Fig. 3 revealed that the cleavage of 
the  central  ring  dominates  the  decomposition 
initiation of both BNFF-1 and ANFF-1 molecules 
and breaking of the peripheral rings requires only a 
slightly higher energy. In contrast to BNFF-1 and 
ANFF-1 the cleavage of the outer ring dominates 
in the BNFF decomposition. Most importantly the 
concerted ring opening reactions exhibit the lowest 
activation  barriers  47-50  kcalmol  Table  1 
among  all  mechanisms  explored  in  these  three 
The next important decomposition mechanism 
is  the  homolytic  C-NO2  bond  cleavage  which  is 
usually  considered  the  primary  decomposition 
reaction  step  for  nitro-compounds.  Despite  being 
the fastest reaction the C-NO2 homolysis prevails 
only at high temperatures due to a notably higher 
activation  barrier    60  kcalmol  Table  1  than 
that  of  the  ring  opening  process.  The  CONO 
isomerization  could  co-exist  with  the  primary 
dissociation  channel  although 
somewhat  higher  activation  barrier  than  the  ring 
opening  reactions.  However  the  CONO  reaction 
proceeds  at  a  much  lower  rate  Fig.  3  due  to  a 
noticeably low pre-exponential factor.  
Table  1.  M06-calculated  activation  barriers  E 
kcalmol  zero-point  corrected  barriers  EZPE 
kcalmol reaction energies given in parentheses 
and  pre-exponential 
decomposition  reactions  of  BNFF  BNFF-1  and 
ANFF-1 isolated molecules. 
Fig.  3.  Reaction  rates  of  decomposition  channels 
of BNFF BNFF-1 and ANFF-1. 
Table  2.  PBE-calculated  activation  barriers  E 
kcalmol  zero-point  corrected  barriers  EZPE 
kcalmol reaction energies given in parentheses 
and  pre-exponential 
decomposition reactions of BNFF 001 surface.  
4  Outer RC   48.0 31.7 45.1 45.5 
aEZPE  values  obtained  for  gaseous  decomposition  of 
BNFF at PBEcc-pVDZ level.  
49.1 -11.0 46.8 47.2 
To  simulate  decomposition  of  BNFF  on  the 
001  surface  we  chose  three  low  energy  fast 
mechanisms  the  NO2  loss  CONO  isomerization 
and cleavage of the outer ring. Table 2 shows that 
the  break  of  the  C-NO2  bond  in  BNFF  molecule 
placed on the surface costs 56.2 kcalmol which is 
3.6 kcalmol lower than that in the gas-phase. The 
activation  barrier 
45.1  kcalmol  and  preexponential factor lgA 15.5 Table 2 calculated 
for  the  outer  ring  cleavage  path  on  the  surface 
agrees  well  with  the  Arrhenius  parameters  of 
BNFF  decomposition  obtained  from  differential 
scanning  calorimetry  measurements  Ea42.3 
lgA13.682.  The  obtained  prekcalmol  and 
exponential  factors  Table  2  and  reaction  rates 
Fig.  4  indicate  that  the  cleavage  of  the  outer 
oxadiazol  ring  of  BNFF  will  be  the  predominant 
decomposition pathway at T600 K and the NO2 
the  fastest  reaction  at  higher 
Fig.  4.  Reaction  rates  of  decomposition  channels 
of the 001 BNFF surface 
We  report  a  preliminary  study  of  synthesis 
and  stability  of  novel  energetic  furazan-based 
heterocycles.  Calculated  Arrhenius  parameters 
revealed  that  the  cleavage  of  the  furazan  ring 
dominates  the  thermal  decomposition  of  BNFF 
BNFF-1  and  ANFF-1  molecules.  The  next 
important  decomposition  mechanism 
homolytic  C-NO2  bond  cleavage.  Despite  being 
the fastest reaction the C-NO2 homolysis prevails 
only  at  high  temperatures.  Solid-state  periodic 
calculations  of  BNFF  showed  that  the  surface 
decomposition proceeds similarly to the molecular 
decomposition.    Our  calculations  imply  that  the 
initiation of chemistry in these novel explosives is 
notably  different  from  both  typical  nitramines 
e.g.  HMX  and  RDX  and  nitro-arenes  e.g. 
TATB.  On  one  hand  the  NO2  homolysis  has  a 
relatively  high  activation  barrier  comparable  to 
nitro-arenes 60 kcalml. On the other hand the 
heterocyclic  ring  opening  mechanism  is  activated 
with a lower energy 45 kcalmol and will likely 
to  be  the  most  favorable  decomposition  pathway 
of BNFF BNFF-1 and ANFF-1 materials. 
Work  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the 
U.S.  Department  of  Energy  by  the  Lawrence 
Livermore  National  Laboratory  under  Contract 
DE-AC52-07NA27344. This research is supported 
in  part  by  ONR  Grant  N00014-12-1-0529  and 
NSF.  We  used  NSF  XSEDE  resources  Grant 
DMR-100054  and  DOE  NERSC 
Contract  DE-AC02-05CH11231.  MMK 
grateful  to  the  Office  of  the  Director  of  National 
Science  Foundation  for  support  under  the  IRD 
program.  Any  conclusions  and  recommendations 
expressed in this material are those of the authors 
and  not  necessarily  represent  the  views  of  the The Effect of Confinement on Cookoff of a Plastic Bonded Explosive PBX 9501 
Michael L. Hobbs and Michael J. Kaneshige 
Engineering Sciences Center 
Sandia National Laboratories Albuquerque NM 87185 
Energetics Components Center 
Sandia National Laboratories Albuquerque NM 87185 
Abstract. The apparent random response of cookoff of explosives exposed to accidental 
fire resulting in loss of life and property remains a major unsolved problem. Even well 
controlled  laboratory  cookoff  experiments  such  as  Sandias  Instrumented  Thermal 
Ignition SITI experiment occasionally have anomalous results. We propose that some of 
these  anomalous  results  can  be  explained  by  pressure-dependent  reactions  that  occur 
within explosives that are pressed close to the theoretical maximum density TMD. We 
postulate  that  self-confinement  effects  are  enhanced  when  gas-phase  reactions  are  rate 
limiting and the gases are retained within the energetic material.  This condition occurs in 
high-density pressings especially when a binder is used or in a melt-castable explosive 
with little or no internal porosity. We will show both experimental and modeling evidence 
supporting our hypothesis using the plastic bonded explosive PBX 9501. 
The need to understand cookoff of explosives 
was  magnified  when  the  USS  Forestall  aircraft 
carrier  was  severely  damaged  from  an  accidental 
jet  fuel  fire  and  a  series  of  explosions  that  killed 
134 men injured 161 men and caused 72 million 
in  damage  in  1967.1  Knowing  the  ignition  time 
the  amount  of  decomposition  gases  and  the  burn 
behavior in damaged energetic materials EM can 
minimize  such  losses.  Small-scale  experiments 
like the one-dimensional time-to-ignition ODTX 
experiment2  and  Sandias  instrumented  thermal 
ignition  SITI  experiment3  have  been  used  to 
study  cookoff.  Unfortunately  these  small-scale 
experiments do not always scale to larger systems. 
Decomposing  explosives  can  generate  gas 
pressures as high as 1500 atm 22000 psi in the 
ODTX  experiment  before  confinement  failure. 
This  pressure  is  significantly  higher  than  the 
expected  bursting  pressure  of  larger  systems 
especially  when  the  failure  occurs  at  a  welded 
experiment with significantly higher pressures will 
be too fast for the lower pressure system. 
then  kinetics  obtained 
rate-limiting  step 
The pressure generated in the SITI experiment 
represents  the  gas  pressure  accessible  to  the 
gaugethat  is  the  gases  that  have  escaped  from 
the bulk explosive. The gas pressure produced by 
decomposition  deep  within  the  pores  of  the 
explosive  may  be  significantly  higher  than  the 
measured  pressure.  For  highly  pressed  explosive 
with little or no porosity the pressure is generated 
a In the current work pressure dependency can 
also be thought of as a dominating gas phase 
reaction since gas concentration is directly 
proportional to pressure e.g. nV  PRT. 
in  a  closed-pore  network.  The  pressure  generated 
within  these  closed-pore  networks  can  dominate 
the  reaction  process.  Behrens  discussed  ratecontrolling 
microscopic defects in crystalline HMX.4 Behrens 
reaction scheme depended on 9 different physical 
processes. Incorporating all of these morphological 
features  into  a  model  for  large-scale  systems  has 
Recently  we  have  incorporated  some  of 
into  an  engineering  model  of 
thermally  decomposing  PBX  9502.5  This  model 
has been used to successfully simulate vented and 
sealed  systems  containing  from  2  to  1300  g  of 
PBX 9502 95 TATB with 5 Kel-F.6  
reaction  describes 
The objective of the current paper is to apply 
the  same  principles  of  closed-pore 
decomposition  to  cookoff  of  PBX  9501  95 
HMX 2.5 Estane and 2.5 BDNPA-F. Four 
reaction  steps  are  used  to  model  PBX  9501 
ignition.  The  first  reaction  describes  drying 
removal  of  adsorbed  water  of  the  PBX  the 
nonvolatile  residue  NVR  and  a  stable  water 
decomposition of the NVR into stable equilibrium 
reaction  describes 
decomposition  of  the  PBX  into  its  equilibrium 
products.  Only  the  last  reaction  is  assumed  to  be 
pressure  dependent.  The  remainder  of  the  paper 
describes the model and predictions of the ODTX 
and SITI experiments. 
We  model  thermal  ignition  of  PBX  9501  by 
solving  the  conductive  energy  equation  using  a 
volumetric  source  for  chemical  reactions.  Two  of 
the  reactions  use  distributed  activation  energies 
and one of the reactions uses a pressure-dependent 
reaction rate. The pressure is assumed to be only a 
function of time that is PxyztPt.  However 
the  pressure  is  calculated  within  the  closed  pore 
volume  for  sealed  systems.  The  closed  pore 
volume increases due to thermal expansion of the 
bulk  explosive  or  due  to  strain  caused  by  gas 
generation. We use an empirical strain model as an 
engineering  simplification  of  a  more  complex 
stress  strain  constitutive  model7  which  is  beyond 
the scope of the current work. The current model 
assumes  a  single  temperature  for  the  gas  and 
condensed  phases  that  is  Tgxyzt    Tcxyzt. 
The  model  also  assumes  that  the  pore  space  is 
either fully open or fully closed.  
Figure 1 shows the four-step pressure-depend 
reaction  mechanism.  The  first  step  represents 
drying.  We  assume  that  the  amount  of  adsorbed 
water is 0.1 by weight for all of our simulations. 
The kinetics for water desorption is the same as in 
Reference  5  with  the  water  desorption  enthalpy 
being  the  heat  of  vaporization  of  water  2.26106 
95 HMX 2.5 Estane 2.5 BDNPAF
1 Drying hr1  2.26106 Jkg endothermic
2 NVR formation hr2  0 Jkg
3 NVR decomposition hr3  -7.29106 Jkg exothermic
       NVR C1.47H0.86N2.6O1.69 1.3 N2  0.026 H2O 
       0.832 CO2  0.165 CH4  0.074 H2  0.473 C
       NVR   2.397 Gas  0.473 Carbon
4 PBX 9501 decomposition hr4  -5.97106 Jkg exothermic
       PBX 9501 C1.47H2.86N2.6O2.69 1.3 N21.026 H2O
       0.832 CO2  0.165 CH4  0.074 H2  0.473 C
       PBX 9501   3.397 Gas  0.473 Carbon
Fig. 1. Four-step reaction mechanism. 
The  second  reaction  step  is  the  formation  of 
nonvolatile residue NVR with the loss of a single 
molecule  of  water.  Formation  of  the  NVR  is 
assumed  to  be  thermally  neutral.  We  assume  that 
only 30 of the PBX 9501 forms NVR which is a 
equilibrium products. The reaction enthalpy for the 
3rd  reaction  -7.29106  Jkg  exothermic  was 
determined  using  Hesss  law  with  the  heat  of 
formation of NVR 251.3 kJmol determined from 
the neutral 2nd reaction. 
The  final  reaction  is  the  decomposition  of 
PBX 9501 directly into equilibrium products. The 
drops after the - phase change and is similar to 
the  lowest  measured  thermal  conductivity.  The 
baseline  specific  heat 
Popolato.10  We  used  an  effective  capacitance 
method to account for the latent enthalpy of the  phase change and HMX melting. 
Fig. 3. a Thermal conductivity b specific heat. 
Table 1. PBX 9501 ignition model.  
4  3.397 gas  0.473 C  
  NVR 3  2.397 gas  0.473 C  
Nomenclature and parameters given in Table 3. 
equilibrium  calculations  using  the  BKWS-EOS.8 
The  equilibrium  products  from  300  to  1000  K  at 
both 1 atm and 100 atm are shown in Figure 2. The 
reaction enthalpy for the final reaction -5.97106 
Jkg  exothermic  was  determined  using  the  heat 
of formation of PBX 9501 9.5 kJmol. The water 
desorption  reaction 
decomposition  reaction  is  exothermic  and  the 
products is exothermic.  
cookoff temperature range
Fig. 2. PBX 9501 equilibrium products. 
Conservation Equations 
the  conductive  energy 
equation reaction mechanism rate equations and 
species equations for the PBX 9501 decomposition 
model. Table 2 shows how pressure is determined 
in a closed system using the BKWS-EOS. Table 3 
gives  the  nomenclature  and  model  parameters. 
Model  parameters  include  the  kinetic  parameters 
gas  equation  of  state  constant  thermophysical 
The thermal conductivity and specific heat for 
PBX  9501  is  plotted  in  Fig.  3.  We  used  the 
technique described by Erikson et al.9 to determine 
the  thermal  conductivity  before  the  -  phase 
change. We assumed that the thermal conductivity   
Table 2. Equations to calculate pressure. 
Table 3. Nomenclature and model parameters. 
Symbols Units  Description 
Bulk specific heat  See below 
Cb T  530 K Tm 1844.62hmTm 
H2Oa kmolm3  Adsorbed water 
H2Og kmolm3  Water gas 
Init. gas vol. frac.  1-boco 
NVR gas mol. wt.  31.8 
PBX gas mol. wt.  27.8 
forming eq. prod.  1-H2Oa-PBXnvr 
normsinv for rxn 1  Field variable 
normsinv for rxn 2  Field variable 
Liq. rate multiplier 
Liq. rate multiplier 
 Distributed Activation Energy Model 
Pressure exponent   1.0 
Inv. st. norm. dist.  Function 
PBXEP kmolm3  Conc. of PBX 
Init. cond. density  1860 
React. solid fract.  Field variable 
Solidsi kmolm3  Solid conc. 
Init. temp. ODTX  300 guess 
The  distributed  activation  energy  model  used 
in  reactions  1  and  2  is  implemented  using  the 
normsinv  function  which  is  the  inverse  of  the 
standard  normal  distribution  function  shown  in 
Fig.  4.  The  distribution 
is based on the progress 
of  reaction  1  and  2.  A 
positive  value  of  1 
and a negative value of 
decomposition  reaction 
Pore Crush and Bulk Swelling Model 
Fig. 4 normsinv function.
The  gas  volume  in  Table  2  is  the  internal 
volume of the pores. The solid volume of the EM 
is  assumed  to  thermally  expand  based  on  the 
thermal expansion model given in Eq. 11 in Table 
2. The change in density shown in Fig. 5 due to the 
-  phase  change  is  also  accounted  for  using  Eq. 
11.b.  If  the  overall 
strain in the bulk EM 
is  zero  the  thermal 
expansion of the solid 
EM  causes  the  pore 
volume  to  decrease. 
Fig. 5 Condensed density.
25.4  m m   diameter PBX Distance mm
cm  diameter  by  1.27  cm  tall  cylinders  of  PBX 
9501. Thermocouples are located at various radial 
explosives  as  shown  in  Fig.  7.b.  The  exterior 
the  confining  aluminum  was 
maintained  at  a  controlled  set  point  using  a  rope 
heater.  Typically the exterior temperature of the 
SITI  PBX  9501  experiments  were  ramped  from 
room temperature to a set point temperature in 1020  minutes  and 
experiments  were  sealed  except  for  one  which 
was  vented.  A  few  of  the  experiments  had  a 
pressure  tap  to  monitor  the  pressure  during  the 
Fig. 7 a SITI apparatus b cross-section of EM. 
A  comparison  between  the  predicted  and 
measured  SITI  temperatures  is  shown  in  Fig.  8. 
The  model  predictions  are  given  in  red  and  the 
measurements  are  in  green.  The  model  and  data 
are  the  same  except  for  the  details  near  the  -  
thermodynamic  phase  transition  and  data  shows 
some cooling during the phase transformation. The 
transition.  The  model 
Vswell in Table 3 describes bulk expansion or 
swelling.  The  change  in  gas  volume  within  the 
closed pore structure is approximated by Vswell and 
is  shown  in  Fig.  6.  Vswell  is  a  function  of  the 
average  EM  temperature  and  is  divided  into  bulk 
thermal  expansion  below  the  -   phase  change 
and  both  thermal  expansion  and  volume  change 
caused by reaction generated gases above the -  
phase change. The bulk-swelling model is a simple 
engineering  approximation  to  a  complex  stressstrain  relationship.  More  experiments  are  needed 
to understand the strain associated with reactions. 
Fig. 6. Change in bulk volume. 
experiments  1  SITI3  2  ODTX2  and  3  an 
NAWCWD  Naval  Air  Warfare  Center  Weapons 
Division  China  Lake  pipe  experiment1112  filled 
with  PBX  9501.  Two  of  the  SITI  experiments 
were used to obtain kinetic parameters. The ODTX 
and  NAWCWD  pipe  bomb  tests  are  used  as 
validation of the model. 
The SITI experiments have been described in 
detail  in  previous  symposium  proceeding3  and  a 
convenience.  The  SITI  experiment  is  shown  in 
Fig. 7.a. Each SITI experiment contains two 2.54 
model  predicts  the  internal  pressure  within  the 
closed pore network. The measured gas pressure is 
the pressure external to the PBX. 
Fig. 8 SITI run  201 temperature and pressure. 
Fig. 9. Ignition times for PBX 9501 in SITI. 
Figure  9  shows  the  measured  ignition  times 
for  all  of  the  SITI  runs  which  include  minor 
changes  in  ullage.  For  clarity  only  four  model 
simulations  are  shown  in  Figure  9  64  201 
202  and  155.  The  predicted  ignition  time  for 
vented  experiment  208  is  also  shown  in  Fig.  9. 
The  difference  between  ignition  times  for  vented 
experiment 208 and sealed experiment 202 is 3 
h  and  20  m.  A  pressure-dependent  mechanism 
similar to the model discussed in the current work 
is  necessary  to  predict  the  effects  of  venting.  For 
the  simulations  in  Fig.  9  the  pressure  exponent 
was  set  to  unity  for  the  sealed  experiments  and 
zero for the vented experiment. 
All of the predicted SITI ignition times were 
calculated  to  be  thermal  ignitions  except  for  Run 
201.  For  this  experiment  the  predicted  thermal 
ignition  time  was  22700  s  which  is  much  higher 
than  the  measured  ignition  time  of  16500  s. 
However hydrostatic tests of the SITI experiment 
suggest  that  the  failure  pressure  is  about  12000 
psi.  The  predicted  time  for  Run  155  to  reach 
12000  psi  was  17000  s  which  is  much  closer  to 
the experimental ignition time. 
The  ODTX  experiments  have  been  described 
in  a  previous  symposium  proceeding2  and  will 
only  be  described  briefly  in  the  current  work.  In 
the ODTX experiment a 1.27 cm diameter sphere 
of  PBX  9501  is  confined  between  two  7.62  cm 
diameter  aluminum  cylinders  or  anvils.  A 
accommodate the explosive.  
A  groove  is  machined  into  the  anvils  of  the 
ODTX  apparatus  near  the  explosive  edge  with  a 
copper ring that is plastically deformed to seal in 
decomposition  gases.  The  ODTX  experiment 
confines  decomposition  gases  up  to  1500  atm 
22000 psi. The anvils are heated to a prescribed 
temperature  giving  a  constant 
the  one-dimensional 
boundary  condition 
The ODTX experiment was improved in 2002 
for  better  gas  sealing  and 
placement as discussed by Tarver and Tran.13 This 
new  ODTX  experiment  was  used  to  measure 
ignition times for PBX 9501. Figure 10 shows the 
measured  symbols  and  predicted  black  line 
ignition  times  for  PBX  9501  in  the  ODTX 
apparatus.  Data  from  both  the  old  and  new 
apparatus are shown in Fig. 10.  
The predicted ignition times of the PBX 9501 
in the ODTX apparatus are in fair agreement. The 
change  in  ignition  times  near  1000T  of  1.9  is 
related  the  boundary  temperature  being  greater 
than the melting point of the HMX which is 530 
K or 1000T  1.9. In the model the liquid HMX 
decomposition  rates  are  assumed  to  be  10  times 
greater than solid HMX decomposition rates.  
Fig. 10. Ignition times for PBX 9501 in ODTX.13 
NAWCWD Pipe Experiment 
Erikson  et  al.1112  describe  the 
experiment shown schematically in 
Fig. 11. Only a brief description of 
the experiment is discussed herein. 
Three 2.2 cm diameter cylinders of 
PBX  9501  were  inserted  into  a 
machined  1018  steel  tube  with  an 
expansion  gap  and  insulator.  The 
pipe  was  sealed  with  a  steel  plug 
referred  to  as  Torq  N  Seal.14 
The total explosive length was 10.2 
cm  and  the  explosive  mass  was 
71.56  g  giving  a  density  of  1.846 
maximum  density.  The  ullage  is 
All  but  one  of  the  predictions  were  thermal 
ignitions wherein thermal runaway was calculated 
prior to the system reaching the burst pressure of 
1500  atm  22000  psi.  The  lowest  temperature 
prediction  at  1000T    2.2  was  a  pressure  burst. 
For this simulation the pressure was 22000 psi at 
16500  s.  Thermal  ignition  occurred  at  19740  s 
where the calculated pressure was 98000 psi. 
aged PBX in old ODTX
Figure  12  shows  the  mesh  used  in  the  finite 
element  code  calculated  temperature  contours 
near  ignition  and  line  plots  of  the  measured  and 
thermocouples located on the exterior of the pipe. 
There  are  10  calculated  temperatures  profiles  at 
even spatial locations starting at the center of  the 
explosive going to the edge of the explosive. The 
calculated  pressure  profile 
decreases during the - phase change and also as 
the explosive swells due to reaction. 
NAWCWD pipe experiment was 3 h 53 m and the 
calculated ignition time was 4 h 2 m.  Erikson and 
Schmitt  calculated 
different kinetic models. Using the original HMX 
model  from  McGuire  and  Tarver22  Erikson 
calculated an ignition time of 4 h and 47 m 54 m 
longer than the measured ignition time. 
b Contours at 4 h in PBX 9501
c Temperature profiles and interior pressure
Measured pipe exterior
Fig. 12 Pipe a mesh b temperature contours and 
c temperature profiles and interior pressure. 
Summary and Conclusions 
Ignition of PBX 9501 was modeled using data 
based  on  observations  from  various  confined  and 
one  vented  experiment.  This  pressure-dependent 
confinement  and  venting  at  least  for  the  single 
vented experiment. The model was also evaluated 
using data from other laboratories1 the ODTX 
experiments with about 2 g of PBX 9501 and 2 a 
verification experiment using 70 g of PBX 9501 at 
the  Naval  Air  Warfare  Center.  The  model 
adequately  predicted 
experiments  that  were  performed  at  different 
scales.  We  believe  additional  experiments  are 
necessary  to  improve  the  model  and  to  better 
understand  the  effect  of  venting.  We  suggest 
obtaining more data on vented experiments as well 
as  investigate  the  effects  of  density  since  all  the 
experiments were performed at a single density. 
The PBX 9501 model discussed in the current 
work  is  a  preliminary  model.  We  believe  the 
model  can  be  improved  significantly  using  more 
unconfined SITI experiments similar those done in 
Reference  5.  We  plan  to  improve  the  model  and 
provide  a  more  thorough  model  validation  in  the 
Internal  document  number 
laboratory  operated  by  Sandia 
Corporation a Lockheed Martin Company for the 
U.S.  Department  of  Energys  National  Nuclear 
Security Administration under Contract DE-AC0494AL85000. 
SAND2014-5007C.  The authors acknowledge the 
Joint  DoDDOE  Munitions  Program  for  partial 
support  of  this  work.  We  would  like  to  thank 
Shane Snedigar for running the SITI experiments 
Bill  Erikson  for  helping  to  determine  the  thermal 
the  NAWCWD  experiment  Eric 
Harstad  for  leading  the  energetics  team  and 
funding  and  Anthony  Geller 
management  support.  Our  internal  as  well  as 
external reviewers are also appreciated. Mechanisms of Comp-B Thermal Explosions 
Elizabeth A. Glascoe Martin R. Dehaven Matthew McClelland Daniel W. Greenwood H. Keo 
Springer and Jon L. Maienschein 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
Abstract.  The  LLNL-scaled  thermal  explosion  experiment  STEX  was  designed  with 
numerous diagnostics in order to 1 capture the physics and chemistry of an explosive 
prior to thermal ignition and 2 quantitatively measure the violence post-ignition. With 
this abundance of diagnostics and supporting experiments such as decomposition kinetics 
and  deflagration  rates  the  mechanisms  of  thermal  explosion  can  be  better  understood. 
Here we discuss recent experiments on Comp-B with an emphasis on the importance of 
vessel confinement strength and the inclusion of a vent hole in the vessel. Our discussion 
will highlight the pre-ignition mechanisms and provide insight into the mechanisms that 
dictate the violence of Comp-B and possibly other explosives. 
the  chemical  and  physical 
mechanisms underlying a thermal explosion of an 
energetic  material 
assessment  and  accident  prevention.  These 
mechanisms  are  complex  therefore  experiments 
and  modelingsimulations  need  to  complement 
each other.  At  Lawrence  Livermore National  Lab 
LLNL  our  approach  is  to  parameterize  models 
with small experiments e.g. 10g validate these 
models  with  medium  scale  experiments  e.g. 
1000g  and  then  predict  thermal  explosions 
using  the  models.  To  that  end  the  Scaled 
Thermal  Explosion  eXperiment  STEX  was 
developed as a high fidelity validation experiment 
for ALE3D thermal explosion models.  
STEX is a medium scale experiment in which 
approximately 500-700 g of explosive is heated at 
a  controlled  rate  as  slow  as  1  Cmin  until 
explosion.  The  experiment  is  heavily  diagnosed 
thermocouples  an  embedded 
pressure sensor external strain gauges radar horns 
and  photo-doppler  velocimetry 
violence  and  high  speed  video.  The  vessel  is 
tightly  sealed  to  prevent  pre-ignition  leaking 
which  can  quench  a  thermal  explosion  in  some 
cases and provides an excellent study of thermal 
explosion  pre-ignition  phenomena  and  postignition  violence.  This  experiment  was  described 
in  detail  previously1  however  as  with  any 
experiment it has matured as diagnostics improve 
and scientific questions arise. 
Comp-B is an important explosive because of 
its performance and the fact that it is melt-castable. 
The typical formulation consists of approximately 
60  RDX  and  40  TNT  sometimes  wax  is 
included in the formulation. Many have studied the 
thermal explosion of Comp-B both because of its 
current use in various applications and as a model 
system for other melt-castable explosives. To that 
end LLNL performed a series of Comp-B thermal 
explosion  experiments  and  reported  the  results  in 
2002.1 The previous STEX experiments on CompB used vessels able to confine the explosive up to 
1 or 2 kbar 100 or 200 MPa and heating rates of 
1 2 or 3 Cmin. The results of these experiments 
demonstrated that increasing confinement resulted 
in  increased  violence  and  increasing  heating  rate 
reduced the violence.  
Because  1  or  2  kbar  confinement  pressure  is 
much  larger  than  what  is  typically  found  in  real 
containers  e.g.  storage  containers  a  study  of 
confinement  was  necessary.  To  that  end  we 
performed two STEX experiments using a  kbar 
50  MPa  confinement  vessel 
hermetically sealed and the second was allowed a 
the  vented  experiment  was 
significantly  more  violent  than  the  hermetically 
sealed experiment as will be discussed in detail.  
Our experiments are not the first to investigate 
the influence of venting on the thermal explosion 
of  Comp-B.  Krawietz  et  al.  at  the  Air  Force 
Research  Laboratory 
explosion  mechanism  of  Comp-B  in  a  1L  round 
bottom flask i.e. glass with an open neck.2 Their 
mechanisms  of  various  formulations  variable 
amounts  of  TNT  and  RDX.  However  the  open 
neck  in  the  vessel  could  allow  for  significant 
evaporation  and  evaporative  cooling  of  TNT 
thus  their  results  may  not  be  applicable  to  sealed 
vessel  conditions.  In  addition  their  post-ignition 
violence  assessment  was  qualitative  as  they  were 
only  able  to  look  at  the  explosion  debris  size  of 
their wood-paneled oven. Their results are difficult 
to model especially for violence metrics. Madsen 
et  al.  at  Picatinny  Arsenal  performed  a  series  of 
STEX-like  experiments  in  which  the  top  end-cap 
was  deliberately  drilled  out  with  one  or  many 
holes  in  order  to  allow  for  venting.3  Their 
experiments  used  a  minimum  number  of 
diagnostics  i.e.  video  at  30  fps  and  postexplosion  fragment  assessment  and  were  not 
designed  as  a  validation  test  for  high  fidelity 
modeling.  In  addition  their  experiments  utilized 
band  heaters  around  the  vessel  wall  that  may 
change the wall strength in uncharacterized ways 
making  it  difficult  to  model  or  understand  the 
violence based on fragment distributions. Based on 
interesting.  Because  our  experiment 
these previous experiments it was clear that light 
confinement  and  vented  experiments  would  be 
heavily diagnosed the results are extremely useful 
for  model  validation  work.  Finally  because  we 
can  directly  compare  our  results 
confined  STEX  experiments  we  can  gain  new 
role  of  confinement  and 
hermaticity in a thermal explosion. 
The  STEX  design  was  detailed  in  previous 
publications1  however  because  of  maturing 
diagnostic  capabilities  there  have  been  some 
changes  that  will  be  discussed  briefly  here.  The 
vessel is made of 4130 steel the inner dimensions 
are 2 inches diameter x 8 inches tall. Diagnostics 
described  previously 
internal  thermocouple  probe  a  pressure  gauge 
four strain gauges on the vessel exterior numerous 
RTD  temperature  probes  on  the  vessel  exterior 
and  radar  horns  to  measure  fragment  velocities 
after    the  explosion.  New  diagnostics  include 
photo-doppler velocimetry PDV probes and high 
speed  video  150000  fps  or  6.67  sframe.  The 
vessel  is  heated  via  three  IR  lamps  around  the 
cylinder walls and stove top heaters on the top and 
bottom  flange  to  prevent  heat  loss  at  the  ends  of 
the  charge.  Figure  F1  shows  a  photo  of  a  fully 
assembled STEX experiment before explosion. 
 Two  experiments  were  performed  labeled 
TE-66 and TE-67. TE-66 was hermetically sealed 
and  includes  all  the  diagnostics  described  above. 
TE-67  was  identical  to  TE-66  except  that  the 
pressure sensor was removed and replaced with a 
vent-tube  and  overflow  spill  cup. 
experiments  Comp-B  LLNL  lot  C-377  shipped 
from Dyno Inc. in 1999 was cast directly into the 
vessel  TE-66  used  640.0  g  TE-67  used  639.7g 
leaving  39.8  cm3  or  9.7  ullage  at  room 
temperature. This ullage was designed to allow for 
thermal expansion of the materials during heating. 
In both experiments the vessel was heated rapidly 
to 130 C then ramped at 1 Cmin until explosion. 
experiments  were  performed  on  sub-milligram 
quantities  at  various  heating  rates  using  pin-hole 
pans using TA Instruments M2920.  High pressure  
strand burner experiments are described  
elsewhere4 and the results for heated Comp-B are 
presented  here.  Strand  burner 
prepared  by  loading  8  pressed  Comp-B  pellets 
14  diam.  X  14  tall  into  a  Teflon  cup.  Burn 
wires  were  threaded  through  small  holes  in  the 
walls  of  the  cup.  The  cup  was  machined  out  to 
diameter  that  allowed  for  10  expansion  of  the 
pellets as they melted. Samples were heated slowly 
to desired temperature ca. 1.5 Cmin held for 2 
hours and ignited while still hot.  
stages  creating  temperature  spikes  and  or  dips. 
Vessel strain and internal pressure were measured 
but results were unremarkable and are omitted here 
due to space constraints.  
High speed video of the explosion is perhaps 
the  most  revealing.  Figure  F3  shows  stills  of  the 
video. At about -826 s a brown cloud of debris or 
explosive  appears  on  the  right  side  of  the  image 
appearance  is  generally  well  correlated  with  the 
peak pressure at -875 s see Figure F4.  
Fig. F1. Pre-explosion image of STEX experiment 
TE-66 shown here TE-67 looks very similar 
Results and Discussion 
Figure  F2a  shows  the  internal  temperature 
during  the  final  hours  of  the  experiment.  As 
expected the material is hottest at the center. Upon 
closer inspection one can see a slope change in the 
internal  temperatures  at  152  C  for  the  middle 
TC  most  likely  due  to  self-heating  see  also 
Figure F2b. At 162 C the internal temperature 
surpasses  the  external  wall  temperature  and  the 
thermal  runaway  and  explosion  follows  shortly 
afterwards.  It  is  notable  that  in  the  final  stages   
i.e.  165    103  sec  the  thermocouple  readings 
shift  from  smooth  to  jagged  or  bumpy.  In  solid 
explosives  these  temperature  readings  remain 
relatively smooth all the way to thermal explosion 
hence  we  hypothesize  that  the  liquid  inside  the 
vessel  may  be  bubbling  or  frothing  in  these  last 
Fig. F2. a TE-66 internal temperature profile and 
b  derivative  of  middle  TC  showing  slope 
One  would  expect  some  lag  between  vessel 
rupture  and  debris  appearance  and  since  the  first 
rupture occurs out of view from the camera there 
will be extra transit time as the debris moves into 
the  field  of  view.  As  time  progresses  the  debris 
cloud  expands  and  the  vessel  wall  begins  to 
unwrap  and  fly  to  the  left  side  of  the  image. 
Notably  absent  from  all  these  images  is  any 
burning  explosive  in  fact  the  high  speed  video 
images  are  somewhat  dark  because  in  set-up  we 
were  expecting  light  from  the  burning  explosive. 
This video suggests that the material never reached 
full  thermal  explosion  and  burn.  Based  on  the 
thermocouple  data  it  seems  most  likely  that  the 
material was just starting to thermally runaway  
Figure F3. High speed video frames during thermal explosion of TE-66. Red circle designates debris. 
Fig. F4. Fast-scan pressure results for TE-66.  
Fig. F5. PDV and radar results for TE-66.  
and the pressure reached the confinement pressure 
of the vessel causing a burst. 
The violence in this experiment was very low. 
PDV results consistently showed a maximum wall 
velocity  of  30  ms  or  less  and  Radar  reported  a 
maximum  fragment  velocity  of  115  ms  see 
Figure  F5.  Previous  experiments  with  a  2  kbar 
vessel  reported  Radar  measurements  as  high  as 
2800  ms.1  A  post-experiment  photo  is  shown  in 
Figure F6 it reveals minimal damage. In   
Fig.  F6.  TE-66  Post  Expt.  Note  vessel  wall  was 
placed in the in the lower right hand corner of the 
comparison  a  destructive  explosion  will  reduce 
the  whole  assembly  to  a  heap  of  small  fragments 
and shattered endcaps and  flanges see Figure  F9 
In  TE-66  we  observed  the  vessel  rupture 
before it was able to reach full thermal explosion. 
confinement  experiments  which  includes  the  1 
remaining  question 
and 2 kbar experiments done previously was how 
the material would behave when confined but not 
hermetically  sealed.  In  order  to  address  this 
question we decided to set up TE-67 with a small 
The  vent  was  introduced  by  replacing  the 
pressure  sensor  with  a  cup  mounted  on  a  long 
tube. We had hoped that the tube would only vent 
gases however photos of the cup-reservoir during 
accumulation  prior  to  thermal  explosion.  By  our 
estimates  the  cup  contained  about  80  mL  of 
explosive in the final photo before explosion not 
internal  and  wall 
temperatures in the final stages of the experiment. 
Throughout  the  experiment  and  in  particular  at 
thermal runaway the  middle temperature remains 
the hottest. At T198  103 sec when the middle 
TC  hit  154  C  the  interior  temperature  slope 
changed  most  likely  due  to  self-heating.  At  the 
same  timetemperature  three  of  the  five  interior 
temperature  profiles  upper  middle  and  lower 
transitioned from smooth to jumpy eventually the 
top  and  bottom  temperature  profiles  also  became 
jumpy.  As  discussed  in  the  TE-66  section  this 
jumpiness  may  be  indicative  of  bubbling  and 
frothing  of  the  material.  At  163  C  the  interior 
temperature exceeds the exterior wall temperature 
and about two hours later the vessel explodes.   
At  about  830  s  the  flames  appear  to  be  dying 
down but there is a second fireball at ca. 1400 s 
that ramps up until the camera cuts out at 1804 s. 
This second explosion could be the bottom portion 
of  the  charge  exploding  or  may  be  due  to  hot 
projectiles  e.g.  vessel  fragments  or  unreacted 
explosive hitting the heater lamps and exploding.  
From  the  high  speed  video  it  is  evident  that 
the  break-out  began  in  the  upper  portion  of  the 
vessel. However the thermocouple results clearly 
show  the  ignition  at  the  center  of  the  charge.  It 
seems plausible that the burn propagated up from 
the  center  especially  since  there  may  have  been 
more partially decomposedreactive gases in upper 
portion of the vessel allowing for more convective 
The  PDV  and  radar  results  indicate  that  in 
general  the  explosion  was  not  very  violent  see 
Figure  F9.  PDV  peak  velocity  was  417  ms  and 
radar peaked out at 900 ms. In contrast the postexperiment  fragment  analysis  indicates  that  the 
reaction was extremely violent.  
Figure  F10  shows  pre-  and  post-experiment 
photos in the post-experiment the shot-stand  was 
mostly  empty  and  much  of 
diagnostics were reduced to small fragments. The 
vessel  end-cap  and  flange  assemblies  are  also 
shown in Figure F10 and the damage observed was 
the  more  violent  2  kbar  stex 
experiments.1 The top end-cap and flange are still 
attached  to  each  other  and  relatively  unscathed. 
The bottom flange was detached from the endcap 
which  is  only  achievable  by  shearing  off  all  the 
bolts  and  broken  into  6  pieces.  The  bottom 
endcap  center  portion  the  portion  that  was  in 
contact with the explosive was partially punched 
out.  Keeping  in  mind  that  the  flange  and  endcap 
are  both  1  inch  thick  steel  hardened  4130  one 
can  surmise  that  the  explosion  of  the  bottom 
portion  of  the  charge  was  very  violent.  PDV  and 
radar are unable to quantify this violence because 
they are destroyed early in the explosion ca.  -80 
s.  In  fact  both  PDV  probes  mounted  on  the 
lower portion light green and dark green indicate 
almost no wall velocity before they cut out. Based 
on  the  damage  to  the  bottom  endcapflange  we 
know  there  must  have  been  substantial  wall 
velocities  at  some  point  in  the  explosion.  Hence 
we  believe  the  secondary  fireball  observed  in  the 
high-speed video at ca. 1400 s is most like the  
Fig. F7. TE-67 internal temperature profile. 
High speed video shows two explosions both 
are shown in Figure F8 in a series of frames. At 180  s  we  can  first  see  the  first  flames  appear 
indicating that the vessel has started to break open. 
The  fireball  grows  and  saturates  the  camera  at 
about 58 s and begins to recede at about 418 s. 
Fig. F8.  High speed video frames for TE-67.  Vessel can be seen to expand between -266.8 and -180 s.   
explosive  is  TNT  rich  and  may  be  frothy  or 
bubbly.  Because  we  displaced  nearly  80  mL  of 
explosive from the vessel into the cup there must 
be  space  in  the  vessel  top  that  is  occupied  by 
gases. In addition the displaced explosive is  
Fig. F9. PDV and Radar results for TE-67. 
explosion of the bottom half of the charge.  
The thermal explosion locations and violence 
could be explained by the distribution of material 
According to our records this lot of Comp-B is a 
waxless  formulation  with  60  RDX  and  40 
TNT  analytical  testing  is  underway  to  precisely 
characterize  the  percent  of  each  constituent.  At 
elevated temperatures the TNT is liquid and some 
of  the  RDX  has  dissolved  into  the  liquid  TNT.5 
Asthe  temperature  continues  to  rise  one  would 
expect  some  decomposition  of  TNT  and  RDX  to 
Because  the  transient  species  are  fragments  of 
RDX  and  TNT  they  should  have  lower  density 
and  hence  migrate  up. 
undissolved  RDX  crystals  may  settle  as  the  TNT 
melts. Therefore  we  hypothesize that  in the  final 
minutes  or  seconds  before  thermal  explosion  the 
explosive  is  very  heterogeneous  from  top  to 
bottom. The bottom is likely to be RDX rich and 
rather dense as we move up the charge the TNT 
concentration will likely rise and near the top the 
Fig. F10. Post-experiment photos reveal extensive 
damage of TE-67 experiment. 
mostly TNT so the material in the vessel is RDXrich. 
If this picture of the explosive prior to ignition 
is  correct  one  can  hypothesize  that  the  flame 
spreads  up  from  the  center  ignition  point  quickly 
via  convective  heat-transfer  mechanisms.  Hence 
the vessel appears to rupture in the upper portion 
but  the  internal  thermocouples  indicate  that  the 
ignition  zone  i.e.  the  hottest  zone  was  in  the 
center of the charge. Once the vessel ruptures the 
only material left to consume is in the bottom half 
of  the  vessel.  The  pressure  and  temperature  rise 
from the initial burn and explosion may help drive 
the burn down into the bottom. Because RDX is a 
more  violent  and  reactive  material  compared  to 
TNT and because the bottom is likely to be RDX 
rich  it  is  logical  that  the  bottom  of  the  vessel 
experienced  so  much  more  damage  than  the  top. 
This  mechanism  is  hypothesized  but  further 
characterization of the nature of the material prior 
to  ignition  is  necessary  to  fully  understand  the 
mechanisms underlying this STEX experiment.  
Complimentary DSC and Strand Burner Results 
It is notable that in both TE-66 and TE-67 the 
middle internal thermocouple begins to ramp up in 
temperature  at  just  above  150  C.  DSC  results 
shown  in  Figure  F11  reveal  the  onset  of  an 
endothermic process at ca. 145 C. By 150 C this 
endothermic  process 
is  well  underway.  This 
endotherm  could  be  the  melt  of  RDX  or  more 
likely  the  dissolution  of  RDX  into  molten  TNT.  
DSC of neat-RDX reveals an RDX melt of ca. 200 
not  shown.  Preliminary  strand  burner 
experiments  at  100  C  125  C  and  150  C  show 
an  interesting  change  in  burn  behavior  at  the 
highest temperature.  Further work is necessary to 
validate the 150 C strand burner results however 
it  is  likely  that  the  change  in  burn  behavior  is 
correlated  to  the  STEX  observations  at  150  C 
and the DSC results.  
Summary and Conclusion 
In summary two different STEX experiments 
were performed in order to understand the role of 
confinement  pressure  and  hermeticity  on  the 
mechanisms and violence of Comp-B thermal 
Fig.  F11.  DSC  results  on  Comp-B  at  various 
explosions.  These  experiments  were  designed  to 
complement previous STEX experiments that were 
performed at 1 and 2 kbar. In addition it was our 
goal to quantify violence of these lightly confined 
or  unsealed  experiments  and  supply  experimental 
data  for  validation  of  our  ALE3D 
explosion modeling.  
The sealed  kbar experiment was interesting 
because it demonstrated how weakening the vessel 
strength  can  help  to  mitigate  violence.  When  the 
interior pressure exceeded the vessel confinement 
the  whole  vessel  failed  and  the  vent  was  very 
rapid. Because the material had not quite reached 
the  burn  stage  the  damage  was  minimal.  In 
designing safer casing materials a vessel that can 
fail  or  release  uniformly  and  quickly  may  be  the 
best option for minimal damage.  
The  vented    kbar 
surprisingly  violent.  Our  vent  was  designed  to 
allow  pressure  equilibration  during  the  heating 
stages but too restrictive during thermal explosion 
to allow for much mitigation of the violence. The 
vent  worked  as  designed  and  the  result  was  a 
violent  explosion.  Our  hypothesis  is  that  the 
material  was allowed to fully ignite in the vented 
experiment  and  once  ignited  produced  a  violent 
One general question that remains is whether 
venting  other  explosives  will  enhance  or  mitigate 
violence.  Our  previous  STEX  experiments  on 
HMX-based  formulations  indicate  that  a  vent  or 
leak  does  little  to  change  the  violence  of  the 
explosive.1  We  hypothesize 
explosive if the ignition point is at the center of a 
charge  inertial  confinement  helps  to  contain  the 
reactive  gases  and  thermally  insulate  the  ignition 
point.  As  such  a  leak  or  vent  on  the  vessel 
wallseals will do little to change the explosion. In 
particular  as  the  pressure  rises  at  the  ignition 
point  inertial  confinement  prevents  the  pressure 
from pushing on the vessel  walls or releasing  via 
the vent. In contrast if pressure rises at the center 
of  a  liquid  charge  it  is  quickly  transferred  to  the 
walls of the vessel. The pressure rise at the ignition 
point is either relieved via the vent or by pushing 
against  the  vessel  walls.  Based  on  this  logic  one 
would  surmise  that  many  liquid  explosives  might 
be more violent if allowed a small vent and may 
be  mitigated  via  a  substantial  vent  or  an  easily 
destroyed vessel wall. Further work on other liquid 
explosives  would  provide  interesting  insight  into 
This  research  was  partially  supported  by  the 
Development  Program.  This  work  performed 
under  the  auspices  of  the  U.S.  Department  of 
by  Lawrence  Livermore  National 
Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344. Effect of HMX Particle Size on the Times to Explosion of HMX Charges 
Rod C. Drake and Ian Belcher 
Explosive Materials and Initiation Science Group
Nuclear Threat Reduction Operations Group 
Atomic Weapons Establishment Aldermaston Berkshire UK 
            Abstract.  For  efficient  and  effective  development  of  new  formulations  and 
for  safety  assessments  of  munitions  it  is  necessary  to  understand  the  effect  of  the 
characteristics  of  the  constituent  materials  on  the  safety  properties  of  the  formulation. 
The  particle  size  of  explosives can determine the response of formulations to thermal 
mechanical frictional electrical and shock stimuli.
            To  characterize  and  understand  the  effect  of  HMX  particle  size  the  thermal 
response  of  five  HMX 
contained  the  same  proportion of HMX but the particle size distributions were varied.
           Spherical  charges  of  the  formulations  were  held  under  confinement  at  constant 
elevated  temperatures  in  the  One-Dimensional  Time-To-Explosion  apparatus.  The 
to  explosion  were  measured  and  these  ranged  from  a  few  seconds  to  several 
      Numerical  simulations  accurately  described  the  time-to-explosion  behavior  and 
were  used  to  rationalize  the  effect  of  particle  size  on  the  thermal  response  of  the 
formulations  has  been 
All explosives given the right conditions are 
capable of very rapid potentially violent release of 
explosive  must  be 
characterized  so  that  the  conditions  leading  to 
understanding  appropriate  precautions  can  be  put 
into  place  to  ensure  processing  and  operational 
reactions  are  understood.  From 
the  main  motivation 
characterizing and modeling the thermal response 
of  explosives  has  been  to  support  the  assessment 
of munitions to thermal threats for example fuel 
fires.  Assessments  address 
If  and  when  does  an  explosive 
response occur time to explosion 
explosive response? 
It  would  be  prohibitively  expensive 
evaluate  the  response  of  a  prototype  munition 
against  all  the  thermal  threats  experimentally. 
Even  if  the  scope  of  the  experimental  munitionlevel  characterization  programme  was  reduced 
and supplemented by small scale trials a means of 
applying  the  experimental  results  to  other  threats 
and configurations would be required. However a 
fundamental  understanding  of  the  chemical  and 
physical  processes  determining 
response of the explosive formulation can provide 
the  means  to  rationalize  experimental  results  and 
to  predict  the  response  of  the  formulation  in 
warhead  geometries  and  configurations.  The 
increase in computing power and the development 
of  higher  fidelity  experimental  characterization 
techniques  has  provided  the  tools  for  increasing 
the complexity and hence predictive capability of 
In  any  accident  energy 
imparted to the explosive. The energy transferred 
to  the  explosive  can  be  from  shock  mechanical 
impact  friction  heating  or  electrical  interactions 
interactions  result  in  localized  heating  which 
explosive  charge.  Therefore 
response  of  explosives 
decomposition models will be required. 
thermal  decomposition  of 
To  develop  a  thermal  decomposition  model 
requires all the factors that could affect the thermal 
decomposition to be identified and the significance 
or contribution assessed. The requirements of the 
model  will  determine  if  all  factors  need  to  be 
incorporated  into  the  model.  Time  to  explosion 
models  for  HMX  based  explosives  have  been 
developed  and  successfully  applied 
assessment of the response of munitions to thermal 
capability  of  these  models  and  to  extend  their 
understand  the  role  of  HMX  particle  size  on  the 
it  was  deemed  necessary 
Changing  the  HMX  particle  size  can  have 
decreasing  the  HMX  particle  size  decreases  the 
shock initiation threshold for short duration pulses 
whereas  for  long  duration  pulses  it  increases  the 
threshold. Alternatively it has been shown that the 
elimination of  coarse HMX particles  from  plastic 
bonded  explosives  can  lead  to  high  power  high 
explosive  HE  formulations  which  react  less 
violently to mechanical stimuli. 
Karpowicz  and  Brill2  and  Fifer3  have 
proposed  two  opposite  theories  to  rationalize  the 
effect  of  HMX  particle  size  on  the  thermal 
decomposition  intermediates  and  products  being 
the  crystal  structure.  Whilst  
Karpowicz  and  Brill2  argue  that  this  destabilizes 
theories  are  based  on 
the  crystal  lattice  and  promotes  decomposition 
Fifer maintained that it is a stabilizing effect as it 
enables recombination to HMX to occur. 
Karpowicz  Gelfland  and  Brill4  studied  the 
  condensed  phase  transition  in  HMX  and 
concluded  that  the  transition  involved  the rupture 
and reorganization of the intermolecular electronic 
interactions in the crystal lattice4. They also found 
that the activation energies for the phase transition 
and  the  thermal  decomposition  were  very  similar 
rearrangements  were 
determining steps for both processes4. 
The effect of applied pressure in the range 5620MPa  on  the    phase  transition  for  two 
HMX samples with average particle sizes of 3m 
and  175m  has  been  characterized2.  Depending 
on  the  applied  pressure  the  phase  transition 
temperature  of  the  formulation  containing  the 
smaller  HMX  particles  was  between  10C  and 
20C  higher  than  the  formulation  based  on  the 
coarse  particles.  The  difference  in  the  phase 
transition temperatures was attributed to the effects 
of decomposition2.  
The    transition  occurs  just  before  or 
during the onset of thermal  decomposition. If the 
decomposition  intermediates  and  products  are 
generated  and  retained  in  a  crystal  then  the 
intermolecular  interactions  will  become  strained 
and  weakened  which  will  facilitate  the   
transition2. On this basis the higher surface area to 
consequence  that  it  is  easier  for  decomposition 
intermediates  and  products  to  escape  from  the 
crystal  so  minimizing  their  destabilizing  effect. 
Therefore formulations with finer HMX particles 
would  be  expected  to  be  less  thermally  sensitive 
formulations based on coarse HMX particles. 
for  smaller  crystals  has 
Fifer3  proposed  that  the  initial  step  in  the 
thermal  decomposition  of  HMX  is  the  formation 
of  radicals  which  are  the  precursor  to  HMX  ring 
cleavage.  They  also  found 
parameters for the thermal decomposition of HMX 
were  dependent  on  the  phase.  The  gaseous  phase 
had  the  lowest  activation  energy  and  frequency 
factor  pre-exponential  factor  whereas  the  solid 
phase  had  the  highest  values.  The  results  were 
rationalized in terms of a cage effect35. Within a 
In  these  experiments  the  spherical  charges 
were formed by using vacuum grease to bond two 
hemispherical charges together. The hemispherical 
charges 12.7mm diameter were die-pressed to a 
density of 95  0.2 of the theoretical maximum 
HMX  Polyurethane Formulations 
Three  types  of  HMX  with  different  particle  size 
distributions were initially studied. Type A HMX 
produced  by  recrystallization  of  -HMX  from 
cyclohexanone  had  a  size  range  of  50-1000m 
with a median diameter of 400m. Type B HMX 
had  a  bi-modal  size  distribution  with  35  in  the 
size  range  45-1500m  and  65  less  than  45m. 
Type  B  was  produced by  colloid  milling  Type  A 
HMX. The Type C HMX was generated by fluid 
energy milling micronising Type A HMX. It had 
a uni-modal distribution with a maximum particle 
diameter of 40m and a median diameter of 7m. 
Reference  7  contains  a  more  detailed  description 
of  the  three  types  of  HMX.  The  formulation 
designations and the particle size characteristics of 
the  different  types  of  HMX  are  given  in  Table  1 
Table 1. Nominal HMX Particle Size 
crystal  the  mobility  of  newly  formed  radicals  is 
extremely  restricted  facilitating  recombination 
with  the  cyclic  radical.  However  at  a  crystal 
surface  or  in solution  or  in the  liquid phase  the 
radical  may  be  able  to  escape  from  the  crystal 
cage  and  so  enable 
fragment rearrange or undergo decomposition. On 
this basis smaller crystals would be expected to be 
less thermally stable than larger particles. 
the  cyclic  radical 
It was decided to evaluate the effect of HMX 
particle size on the thermal response by measuring 
the times to explosion of charges of highly loaded 
95  by  weight  HMX 
advantage  of  characterizing  highly  loaded  HMX 
formulations is that the contribution of the binder 
to the thermal response is minimized. 
Time to Explosion Measurements 
An integral requirement of this study was for 
high  quality  reproducible  times  to  explosion 
measured  under  well-defined  and  controlled 
conditions.  The  One-Dimensional  Time-ToExplosion 
Lawrence  Livermore  National  Laboratory6  met 
apparatus  designed 
The central element of the ODTX apparatus is 
a  pair  of  cylindrical  aluminium  anvils  each 
76.2mm in diameter and 50.8mm high. A 12.7mm 
diameter  hemispherical  cavity  is  machined  into 
one  face  of  each  anvil  to  accept  a  2g  spherical 
explosive charge of similar  dimensions. Recessed 
knife  blades  machined  into  each  face  around  the 
cavity  close  on  a  sealing  ring  to  provide  a  gas 
tight  seal  containing  any  gaseous  decomposition 
products  during  the  experiment.  The  anvils  are 
electrically  heated  by  means  of  band  heaters  and 
held at a pre-determined temperature controlled to 
The  spherical  charge  is  remotely  loaded  into 
the cavity in the face of the lower anvil. The upper 
anvil  is  driven  down  by  a  pre-charged  pressure 
reservoir  sealing  the  sample  cavity  in  a  time  of 
about  600ms.  The  anvil  closure  pressure  is  such 
that failure of the confinement does not occur until 
the  pressure  within  the  sample  cavity  exceeds 
155MPa.  The  experiments  are  terminated  by  the 
violent  rupture  of  the  confinement  which  is 
detected by a sensitive microphone.  
Particle Diameter  m
Fig. 1. Particle size distribution for HMX Type A 
Particle Diameter  m
Particle Diameter  m
hydroxylisocyanate  ratio  of  unity.  The  moulding 
powders were prepared by a non-aqueous solvent 
thermal  response  of  Formulation  A 
HMX  Type  A  -  HTPB-IPDI  formulation  was 
characterized  over  a  temperature  range  from 
around 190C to  260C  see  Fig.  4.  The  times  to 
explosion of Formulation B the HMX Type A and 
HMX  Type  B  based  formulation  were  measured 
over a range 180 to 280C whereas Formulation 
C HMX Type C was studied over a temperature 
range  of  190C  to  230C.  For  all  the  three 
formulations  there  was  little  scatter  in  the  data 
experimental  system.  By  comparing  the  data  for 
the three formulations Fig. 4 it can be seen that 
the  thermal  responses  of  the  three  formulations 
Fig. 4. Times to explosion for Formulations A B 
At first sight the data would seem to indicate 
that the times to explosion of the three HMX based 
formulations  are  not  determined  by  the  HMX 
particle  size.  The  results  are  not  consistent  with 
those of Tarver and Tran8 who measured the times 
to explosion of pressed spheres of -HMX in the 
ODTX  geometry  fabricated  using  two  different 
classes  of  HMX.  They  found 
fabricated  from  Class  1  HMX  mean  particle 
diameter of 150m had consistently longer times 
Fig. 2. Particle size distribution for HMX Type B 
Fig. 3. Particle size distribution for HMX Type C 
The three types of HMX were formulated with 
5  by  weight  of  a  polyurethane  binder  system7. 
The  binder  system  comprised  a  hydroxylterminated  polybutadiene  HTPB  cured  with 
to  explosion  than  those  fabricated  from  Class  2 
HMX mean particle diameter of less than 10m.  
If  the  particle  size  distributions  of  the  three 
formulations are considered rather than the mean 
particle size a different interpretation is possible. 
The  three  formulations  have  different  average 
particle  sizes  particle  size  ranges  and  largest 
particle  size.  Therefore  these  parameters  cannot 
be  factors  that  affected  the  times  to  explosion  in 
these experiments. Closer inspection of the particle 
size  distributions  established  that  the  smallest 
approximately the same. If the smallest particles in 
a formulation determine the thermal response then 
this would explain the experimental results in Fig. 
HMX  Wax Formulations 
To  evaluate  the  extent  to  which  the  smallest 
particles  in  a  formulation  affect  the  thermal 
response two tailored formulations were prepared. 
HMX Types A B and C were subjected to critical 
sieve  cuts  to  ensure  that  only  a  narrow  range  of 
particle  sizes  were  retained  see  Table  2.  The 
modified  HMX  Type  C  was  blended  with 
paraffin  wax  5  by  weight  and  designated 
Formulation  D.  The  hemispherical  charges  were 
pressed to a 950.2 TMD.  
There were concerns over the packing density 
of the Type A HMX and that the larger particles 
may crack when pressed. To resolve this concern 
HMX  Type  B  was  blended  with  HMX  Type 
A. Paraffin wax 5 by weight was added to the 
blend  and  designated  Formulation  E.  To  further 
reduce the possibility of the cracking of particles 
Formulation E was only pressed to 900.2 TMD.  
The  HMX  particle  size  characteristics  in 
Formulations D and E are given in Table 2. It can 
be seen that the smallest particles in Formulation E 
were around a factor of 2 greater than the largest 
particles in Formulation C. Therefore the particle 
size  ranges  of  the  two  formulations  are  mutually 
exclusive  there  were  no  particle  sizes  that  were 
common to both formulations. 
Table 2. Particle Size Characteristics of the HMX 
in Formulations D and E 
reproducibility  of  the  times  to  explosion  enabled 
the  number  of  experiments  to  characterize  the 
response of Formulations D and E over the range 
210C to 280C to be reduced significantly. 
Fig. 5. Times to explosion for Formulations D  
Over the temperature range considered there is 
systematic  difference  between 
formulations Formulation D containing the finer 
HMX particles has shorter times to explosion. The 
percentage  difference  in  the  times  to  explosion 
increased with increasing temperature. The results 
agree qualitatively with those of Tarver and Tran8 
that  is  the  times  to  explosion  decrease  with 
decreasing HMX particle size. 
To  ensure  that  the  measured  trend  was  not  a 
consequence  of  the  differences  in  the  initial 
pressings  three  charges  of  Formulation  D  were 
pressed  to  a  density  of  90    0.2  TMD  and  the 
times to explosion measured. Within experimental 
error it was not possible to detect differences in the 
times  to  explosion  of  charges  at  90  and  95 
thermal  decomposition  models 
incorporating  multi-step  multi-species  reaction 
schemes  of  arbitrary  complexity  was  used  to 
Formulations  D  and  E.  For  the  purposes  of  this 
study  the  decomposition  of  HMX  was  described 
by  a  three  step  scheme  see  Fig.  6.  A  time  to 
explosion  model  for  Formulation  B9  which  had 
been previously developed was used as the basis 
of the modeling study. 
Rate  A. Z1. exp -E1 RT 
Rate  B. Z2. exp -E2 RT 
Rate  C2. Z3. exp -E3 RT 
Fig. 6. HMX Decomposition Scheme 
The  theories  of  Karpowicz  and  Brill2  and 
Fifer3  are  both  based  on  the  assumption  that  the 
reaction rate is determined by the degree to which 
reactive  intermediates  are  retained  within  the 
crystal.    The  higher  surface  area  to  volume  ratio 
associated  with  smaller  particles  enables  reactive 
size  effects  would  be 
Therefore  particle 
decomposition scheme in Fig. 6. Consequently the 
pre-exponential factor collision frequency of the 
first  step  of  the  published  model  for  Formulation 
B9  was  varied  until 
explosion agreed with the experimental values for 
Formulation D. The parameters for Formulation D 
are  given  in  Table  3  and  the  experimental  and 
predicted times to explosion are compared in  
Fig.  7.  The  temperature  dependent  thermal 
conductivity  and  specific  heat  values  used  in  the 
calculations were taken from Reference 9. 
Table 3. HMX Kinetic Parameters 
Fig. 7. Comparison of experimental and predicted 
times to explosion for Formulations D and E 
Studies  performed  at  Cambridge  University 
have shown that compacts based on coarse HMX 
particles  have  a  thermal  conductivity  which  is  a 
factor of two higher than compacts based on fine 
HMX particles10. Therefore the differences in the 
times to explosion of Formulations D and E could 
be  attributed  to  the  formulations  having  different 
thermal  conductivities.  To  evaluate  this  possible 
effect  the  thermal  conductivity  in  the  model  for 
Formulation D was increased by a factor of two in 
an  attempt  to  match  the  predicted  times  to 
the  experimental  values 
Increasing the thermal conductivity decreased 
the  predicted  times  to  explosion  for  temperatures 
above about 255C whilst below this temperature 
the  times  to  explosion  increased.  At  high 
temperatures in this case above 255C increasing 
the  thermal  conductivity  would  increase  the  heat 
flow into the explosive charges from the anvils and 
temperatures  where 
temperature gradient across the spherical charges 
thermal explosion occurs when the heat generated 
by the decomposition of the HMX within a critical 
volume  exceeds  the  heat  conducted  out  of  the 
critical  volume.  Therefore  increasing  the  thermal 
conductivity  would  increase  the  flow  out  of  the 
critical  volume  and 
It was concluded that differences in the times 
to explosion of Formulations D and E could not be 
attributed to a thermal conductivity effect. A minor 
adjustment was made to the pre-exponential factor 
for the first step in the decomposition scheme for 
Formulation D which  enabled the calculated times 
to explosion to match the experimental values for 
Formulation E see Table 3 and Fig. 7. 
The effect of HMX particle size on the times 
to explosion of highly loaded 95 HMX based 
formulations has been evaluated by a combination 
of  experimental  and  modelling  studies.  In  these 
studies  the  potential  contribution  of  particle  size 
dependent  thermal  conductivity  and  thermal 
decomposition  kinetics  were  considered.  To 
accentuate  any  particle  size  effects  on 
measured  times  to  explosion  three  formulations 
Formulations  A  B  and  C    were  specifically 
developed  to  have  very  different  average  particle 
sizes  particle  size  distribution  and  maximum 
sizes.  Unexpectedly 
indistinguishable.  
The  smallest  HMX  particles  in  Formulations 
A B and C were of a comparable size and it was 
the  smallest  HMX  particles 
determine  the  time  to  explosion  behaviour.  This 
resulted in the development and characterisation of 
Formulations  D  and  E  which  had  mutually 
exclusive  HMX  particle  size  distributions.  The 
times  to  explosion  of  these  formulations  were 
different  Formulation  D  contained  the  smaller 
HMX  particles  and  had  the  shortest  times  to 
agreement with those of Tarver and Tran8. 
A time to explosion model incorporating a 3 
step  reaction  scheme  and  thermal  properties  was 
developed for Formulation D which described the 
measured times to explosion. The model was used 
to  establish  that  the  differences  in  the  measured 
times to explosion for Formulations D and E could 
to  a  particle  size-thermal 
not  be  attributed 
conductivity  effect  modifying 
conductivity  did  not  change  the  trend  in  the 
predicted times to explosion with temperature in 
the same manner as observed experimentally.  
it  would  have  been  expected 
It is accepted11 that the HMX  is the first 
of  the rate  limiting  steps in  the  decomposition of 
HMX.  Based  on  the  results  of  Karpowicz  and 
formulations  with  finer  particles  Formulation  D 
would  have  longer  times  to  explosion.  However 
the  results  presented  in  this  paper  and  those  of 
Tarver and Tran8 show the opposite trend that is 
formulations with finer particles have shorter times 
to explosion. The experimental results agree with 
the postulate proposed by Fifer3. 
The  theories  of  Karpowicz  and  Brill2  and 
Fifer3  are  both  founded  on  the  ability  of  the 
decomposition intermediates to escape from inside 
the crystal. However both theories were based on 
thermal  studies  on  powders.  In  such  a  form  the 
crystals could be considered to be independent of 
the  mobility  of  decomposition 
intermediates within a crystal and their ability to 
escape  the  crystal  would  not  be  affected  by 
adjacent particles. However the time to explosion 
measurements  described 
performed  on  HMX  charges  pressed  to  a  high 
density  90-95  TMD  in  a  gas-tight  sealed 
cavity  with  no  voids  between  the  charge  and  the 
confinement  anvils.  These  conditions  would 
significantly  reduce  the  ability  of  decomposition 
intermediates  to  escape  from  the  crystals  and  the 
From the work presented in this paper it is not 
possible to reconcile the particle size trends in the 
HMX  transition for crystals and the times to 
explosions  for  charges.  However  it  is  speculated 
that for high density confined charges the effect of 
particle  size  on  the  rate  of  reaction  becomes 
significant in determining the times to explosion it 
is  known  that  the  reaction  rate  increases  with 
decreasing size increasing surface area8. Further 
work is required a study to quantify the effect of 
HMX particle size on the times to explosion as a 
function  of  both  charge  density  and  the  free 
volume  within  the  ODTX  charge  cavity  would 
provide insight into the controlling mechanisms. 
Predicting  the  effect  of  particle  size  on  the 
times  to  explosion  of  charges  is  complicated.  A 
charge will contain HMX particles with a range of 
sizes  all  of  which  will  have  different  thermal 
sensitivities.  In  this  study  it  has  been  shown  that 
the  times  to  explosion  are  determined  by  the 
smallest  particles  in  a  formulation.  For  thermal 
ignition  to  occur  the  rate  of  heat  generation  in  a 
critical region of chemically reacting material must 
exceed  the  heat  dissipation  from  that  region. 
Therefore the response may not be determined by 
the smallest particle in a charge if they are below a 
critical density. In such circumstances the response 
will be determined by a number of particles with a 
range of sizes. The formulations used in this study 
particularly  Formulations  D  and  E  had  a 
continuous range of particle sizes and so it is not 
possible to correlate a particular particle size to a 
There is an increasing drive to develop models 
that  are  capable  of  predicting  the  response  of 
explosives  to  thermal  and  other  stimuli  such  as 
spigot  intrusion.  Irrespective  of  the  form  of  the 
energy  imparted  to  an  explosive  in  an  accident 
e.g.  kinetic  energy  in  the  case  of  mechanical 
impacts  the  energy  is  ultimately  converted  to 
thermal  energy.  The  results  in  this  paper  have 
shown  that  the  particle  size  distribution  of  the 
explosive is an important factor in determining the 
ignition and growth of reaction characteristics of a 
charge.  Typically  powder  samples  are  used  to 
the  particle  size  distribution  of  a 
formulation.  However  when  a  powder  is  pressed 
into  a  charge  the  particle  size  distribution  can  be 
modified. The compressive strength of particles of 
elastic  materials  decreases  with  increasing  size. 
Kendall12  predicted  that  for  such  materials  the 
fracture  stress  would  be  inversely  proportional  to 
size.  He  also  predicted  that  there  would  be  a 
critical  size  below  which  cracking  would  be 
impossible.  For  HMX  the  critical  size  has  been 
calculated  to  be  1m  and  therefore  cracking  of 
the HMX particles would have occurred in all the 
formulations  used  in  this  study  when  they  were 
pressed. This assertion is supported by a study in 
which  microscopic  examination  of  sections  of  a 
highly loaded plastic bonded formulation based on 
HMX  Type  B  revealed  cracked  HMX  crystals. 
Therefore to improve the predictive capability of 
time  to  explosion  and  growth  of  reaction  models 
more work is required to understand the extent to 
which  HMX  crystals  crack  when  pressed  into 
charges  and  subjected  to  mechanical  loadings 
associated  with  accident  conditions  and 
quantify  the  thermal  response  as  a  function  of 
particle size ideally with blends with very narrow 
particle size ranges.  
It  has  been  shown  that  HMX  particle  size 
distribution  does  have  an  effect  on  the  thermal 
response  of  highly  loaded  HMX  formulations. 
From time to explosion measurements it has been 
concluded  that  finer  HMX  particles  are  more 
thermally  sensitive  than  coarse  particles.  It  has 
been  found  that  the  times  to  explosion  are 
determined  by  the  smallest  HMX  particles  in  a 
formulation  rather  than  by  the  average  particle 
size  formulations  with  different  particle  size 
distributions can have the same times to explosion 
if  they  contain  similar  numbers  of  the  smallest 
The authors would like to thank Mr C.B. Green 
and Dr K.A. Fleming for their advice and help Pressure Dependence of Slow Cookoff Behavior in PBX 9502 Bucket Tests 
Matthew D. Holmes Gary R. Parker Peter Dickson Brad A. Meyer Chad C. Schmidt 
WX-6 HE Thermal and Mechanical Response Team 
W-7 Gas Transfer Systems 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87544 
Abstract.  Six  thermal  cookoff  experiments  were  performed  with  the  insensitive  high 
explosive  PBX  9502  for  the  purpose  of  model  validation  and  to  characterize  violence. 
Three  pressure  configurations  were  explored  vented  sealed  and  calibrated  1200psig 
burst  pressure.    We  report  thermocouple  pressure  and  high-speed  video  data.    Lowviolence reactions were observed for all six experiments. Time-to-cookoff was found to 
depend  strongly  on  pressure.  A  second  series  of  experiments  was  performed  to  obtain 
permeability  data  for  modeling  gas  transport.  Permeability  testing  of  PBX  9502  was 
performed  on  pristine  and  thermally  damaged  samples  using  two  methods  a  Fancherstyle permeameter and a novel dynamic pycnometry technique. We report the diffusion 
coefficients  and  internal  void  fraction  obtained  from  these  experiments.  Finally  we 
discuss the implications of both the Bucket cookoff and permeability results particularly 
with regard to future modeling needs. 
These  experiments  were  motivated  by  safety 
issues  that  arise  from  exposing  insensitive  high 
environments. In the accident scenario involving a 
fuel  fire  IHE  may  be  exposed  to  bulk  thermal 
heating  which  causes  it  to  become  thermally 
damaged and then to self-ignitethis phenomenon 
is  known  as  cookoff.  Much  effort  has  been 
exerted  towards  developing  a  model  that  can 
time-to-cookoff  given  a  known 
geometry  and  heating  conditions1-3.  Current 
models  are  based  on  data  collected  from  smallsmall 
quantities  of  IHE.  We  performed  a  series  of 
intermediate-scale  Bucket  cookoff 
multiple goals to determine the likelihood of high 
deflagration-to-detonation  transition  DDT  for 
experiments4-8  with 
temperature  and  pressure  data  for  cookoff  model 
development and verification.   
If  the  explosive  is  sufficiently  permeable 
viscous gas flow within the material can effect the 
location  and  time-to-ignition  and  gas  transport 
must  be  included  in  the  model.  This  has  been 
conventional  high  explosive  PBX  95019-11.  A 
second  set  of  experiments  was  performed  to 
measure the permeability of pristine and thermally 
damaged PBX 9502 in two pressing isotropies in 
order  to  quantify  the  role  of  gas  transport  for 
model development12. 
To  the  authors  knowledge  PBX  9502  has 
never  been  observed  to  cookoff  violently  or 
undergo  DDT.  It  has  been  tested  in  several  wellknown experiments such as the One Dimensional 
Time-to-Explosion  ODTX78  the  Los  Alamos 
Radial  Explosion  LARE45  and 
experiments26.  All  of  these  cookoff  experiments 
are  well-confined  sealed  and  small  scale.  The 
typical  result  of  these  tests  has  been  a  pressure 
burst or more benign venting of the confining case 
often  with  unburned  IHE  remaining.  There  is  a 
body  of  evidence  supporting  the  hypothesis  that 
water vapor outgassing might be the cause of the 
pressure burst. Research has shown that there is a 
significant  1000-4800  ppm  fraction  of  water 
physically adsorbed within the PBX 9502 molding 
prills  as  well  as  larger  monolithic  pressed  parts 
that is released upon heating13-15. In addition to the 
physi-adsorbed water water has been observed as 
formation  during  the  thermal  decomposition  of 
TATB Fig. 116-18. Because there are three furazan 
formation  sites  on  a  single  TATB  molecule  the 
potential  exists  for  as  much  as  three  moles  of 
water  produced  for  each  mole  of  TATB.  More 
recently a kinetic model for water outgassing was 
developed  by  Glascoe  et  al.15  to  capture  the 
temperature-dependent rate of water loss.  
Fig. 1. Mechanism of benzofurazan ring formation 
and water production during thermal 
decomposition of TATB.  
thermal  decomposition  pathway 
is  complex  autocatalytic  and  highly 
297-cid13cid12cid10cid83cid271920.  Water 
outgassing  however  begins  at  much 
reason  water-vapor 
induced  pressure  bursts  might  be  causing 
premature  confinement  failure 
cookoff  experiments  before 
Furthermore  if  water  is  permitted  to  escape  the 
ExperimentBucket Cookoff 
concentration  equilibrium  will  shift  and  increase 
the  concentration  of  less  stable  benzofurazan 
species  effectively  sensitizing  the  IHE.    It  has 
been  hypothesized  that  a  case  designed  to  vent 
water  vapor  at  lower  temperatures  might  survive 
concentrations of benzofurazans during its thermal 
runaway leading up to cookoff.   
the  mid-plane  where 
The  PBX  9502  charge  consisted  of  two 
cylindrical  parts  stacked  on  the  cylindrical  axis.  
This two-piece arrangement permitted insertion of 
thermocouples to diagnose the spatial temperature 
runaway  was  expected  to  occur.    Each  part  was 
nominally  3  dia.  x  3  height  mass  656  g 
density  1.89  g  cm-3.    The  parts  were  uniaxially 
pressed from virgin material then faced to within 
the specified height tolerance.  The overall charge 
had  a  LD    2  aspect  ratio  as  in  the  LARE 
experiment5.  The  case  was  heated  radially  to 
A  flanged  aluminum  tube  was  used  as  the 
the  confinement  vessel.  PBX  9502 
undergoes  significant  and  anisotropic  thermal 
expansion  when  heated2122.  This  was  accounted 
confinement  body  so  that  the  IHE  would  expand 
enough to completely fill the ullage allowed inside 
the  body  of  the  assembly.  Ullage  for  expansion 
was provided in order to permit thermally-induced 
morphological damage to occur. 
the  dimensioning  of 
IHE.  This  configuration 
To  interrogate  the  effect  of  pressure  three 
configurations were designed. The first was sealed 
gas  tight  and  had  low  ullage  i.e.  free  volume 
sufficient only to accommodate thermal expansion 
comparable to other smaller scale sealed cookoff 
tests  such  as  the  LARE  tests  and  represents  the 
high-pressure  extreme  limited  by  the  failure 
strength of the case. The second was vented to the 
atmosphere  and  also  had 
configuration represents the low-pressure extreme. 
included  an  attached 
reservoir and a calibrated pressure-relief burst disk 
blocking  a  vent  path  to  the  atmosphere.  This 
third  configuration 
configuration  is  intended  to  represent  a  sealed 
system  with  higher  ullage  where  gases  can 
accumulate and obtain intermediate pressures. 
Fig.  2.  The  three  pressure  configurations.    From 
left to right vented sealed and intermediate burstdisc 
Thermocouples  were  secured  with  Kapton 
tape to three surfaces the HE itself and the inside 
and outside surfaces of the bucket. Thermocouples 
on the HE were located on the top face the midplane and the bottom face. Refer to Table 1 for the 
quantities of thermocouples in each location. 
type  piezoresistive  pressure 
transducer was used for three of the tests Table 1. 
The transducer was rated for 1000psi with a 1.5x 
overpressure  allowance  and  was  mounted  on  a 
standoff  in  order  not  to  exceed  the  operating 
High-speed  video  was  recorded  for  each  test 
Research.  With  a  field  of  view  of  640  cid1  640 
pixels  a  frame  rate  of  10000  frames  s-1  was 
obtained.  The  camera  was  manually  triggered 
when sound from the pressure burst was heard. 
A  2000W  band  heater  and  PID  temperature 
controller  were  used  to  impose  a  2-stage  thermal 
profile.  The  control  thermocouple  was  located  at 
mid-height  in  the  vertically  oriented  joint  in  the 
band  heater.  The  first  heating  stage  for  all  tests 
cid58cid63cid71cid64cid61cid71cid54cid53cid1 cid67cid50cid62cid65cid58cid63cid56cid1 cid50cid69cid1 cid50cid63cid1 cid50cid71cid54cid67cid50cid56cid54cid1 cid67cid50cid69cid54cid1 cid64cid55cid1 cid17cid83cid1 cid62cid58cid63-1 
cid55cid67cid64cid62cid1 cid50cid62cid51cid58cid54cid63cid69cid1 cid69cid54cid62cid65cid54cid67cid50cid69cid70cid67cid54cid1 cid70cid65cid1 cid69cid64cid1 cid12cid13cid10cid83cid27cid1 cid72cid57cid54cid67cid54cid1 it 
was held for a 2.5 hr soak. The duration of the first 
soak  was  determined  using  the  model  developed 
by  Glascoe  et  al.15  to  be  sufficient  to  bake  off 
most  of  the  physi-adsorbed  water  and  to  begin 
generation  of  decomposition  product  water. 
Following  the  first  soak  the  temperature  was 
ramped  again  to  a  second  soak  point  of  at  least 
cid12cid15cid10cid83cid27cid1 cid72cid57cid54cid67cid54cid1 cid58cid69cid1 cid72cid50cid68cid1 cid57cid54cid61cid53cid1 cid70cid63cid69cid58cid61cid1 cid54cid73cid64cid69cid57cid54cid67cid62cid58cid52cid1 cid68cid54cid61cid55heating caused thermal runaway and ignition. The 
second soak temperature was varied between tests 
ResultsBucket Cookoff 
Table  1  summarizes  the  configuration  details 
and results for each of the six experiments. Despite 
variations  in  the  case  configuration  and  the  2nd 
soak  temperature  there  were  many  similarities  in 
response. All tests qualified as slow cookoffs with 
symmetric  thermal  localization  and  exponential 
thermal runaway occurring on the cylindrical axis. 
The high-speed video revealed that all of the tests 
resulted  in  relatively  benign  pressure  bursts  with 
vessel failure occurring at the threaded NPT ports. 
Figure 3 contains nine video frames of the thermal 
explosion from Test 1. Video footage revealed the 
PBX 9502 burning in a pulsed unsteady manner. 
As a point of reference regarding the low violence 
of  reaction  the  turning  mirror  located  6ft  away 
was  neither  damaged  nor  disturbed  during  the 
Post-mortem examination of the case revealed 
only  minor  bowing  of  the  end  caps  and  shear 
failure  of  the  NPT  threads  otherwise  the  case 
appeared intact Fig. 4. Charred IHE residue was 
consumption  of  the  PBX  9502.  Yellow  powder 
was evident on external surfaces near the test site. 
This was assumed to be PBX 9502 residue ejected 
Thermocouple  data  from  Test  1  is  provided 
here and is representative of the data collected in 
all  six  tests.  Figure  5  shows  the  complete  set  of 
thermocouple  data  thirty  thermocouples  from 
Test 1. Figure  6 shows a detailed view of the 2nd 
soak  and  illustrates  the  runaway  centralizing  on 
the cylindrical axis the red trace with markers is 
the centrally located thermocouple. 
Additional  plots  figures  and  images  for  all 
six  tests  can  be  found  in  reference  12  and 
complete data is available on request see note at 
Table 2.  Summary of configurations diagnostics and results. 
Pressure transducer 
 internal thermocouples 
 external thermocouples 
1st soak duration s 
2nd cid50cid47cid34cid43cid1cid51cid38cid45cid48cid38cid49cid34cid51cid52cid49cid38cid1cid3cid57cid20cid4 
2nd soak duration s 
cid26cid34cid55cid7cid1cid51cid38cid45cid48cid38cid49cid34cid51cid52cid49cid38cid1cid3cid57cid20cid4 
a. After thermal expansion of the IHE. 
cid35cid7cid1cid18cid51cid1cid9cid10cid14cid16cid11cid1cid50cid1cid42cid46cid51cid47cid1cid51cid41cid38cid1cid50cid38cid36cid47cid46cid37cid1cid50cid47cid34cid43cid5cid1cid51cid41cid38cid1cid51cid38cid45cid48cid38cid49cid34cid51cid52cid49cid38cid1cid54cid34cid50cid1cid49cid34cid42cid50cid38cid37cid1cid35cid56cid1cid13cid57cid20cid1cid51cid47cid1cid50cid48cid38cid38cid37cid1cid52cid48cid1cid51cid41cid38cid1cid51cid38cid50cid51cid7 
c. Estimated pressure from an extrapolated exponential fit to the pressure data.  The range results from two curves fit 
to different ranges of data 
Fig. 3. High-speed video frames from test 1 showing the result of the thermal explosion. 
Fig. 4. The typical condition of the casing following a cookoff test showing yellow residue on surfaces 
and darkening of the aluminum around the failed NPT-threaded ports on the top lid. 
Boundary thermocouples
Midplane thermocouples
cid1cid17cid15cid5cid1cid2cid19cid21cid28cid33cid21cid31cid3
cid1cid17cid15cid6cid1cid2cid22cid18cid24cid26cid21cid20cid3
cid1cid17cid15cid13cid1cid2cid22cid18cid24cid26cid21cid20cid3
cid1cid17cid15cid5cid4
cid1cid17cid15cid5cid5
cid1cid17cid15cid5cid6
cid1cid17cid15cid5cid7
cid1cid17cid15cid5cid8
cid1cid17cid15cid5cid9
cid1cid17cid15cid5cid10cid1
cid1cid17cid15cid5cid11
cid1cid17cid15cid5cid12
cid1cid17cid15cid5cid13
cid1cid17cid15cid6cid4
cid1cid17cid15cid6cid5
cid1cid17cid15cid6cid6
cid1cid17cid15cid6cid7
cid1cid17cid15cid6cid8
cid1cid17cid15cid6cid9
cid1cid17cid15cid6cid10
cid1cid17cid15cid6cid11
cid1cid17cid15cid6cid12
cid1cid17cid15cid6cid13
cid1cid17cid15cid7cid5
Fig. 5. Complete thermocouple data from Test 1. 
cid17cid24cid27cid21cid1cid2cid25cid32cid3
cid20cid19cid5cid24cid22cid38cid26cid1cid30cid34cid39cid26cid37cid27cid22cid24cid26
cid1cid21cid18cid8cid1cid24cid26cid34cid39cid26cid37
cid1cid21cid18cid9cid1cid37cid1cid17cid1cid8cid6cid12cid16cid1cid33cid33cid1cid27cid22cid30cid32cid26cid25
cid1cid21cid18cid14cid1cid37cid1cid17cid1cid15cid6cid7cid7cid1cid33cid33
cid1cid21cid18cid15cid1cid37cid1cid17cid1cid15cid6cid7cid7cid1cid33cid33
cid1cid21cid18cid10cid1cid37cid1cid17cid1cid8cid13cid6cid7cid7cid1cid33cid33
cid1cid21cid18cid11cid1cid37cid1cid17cid1cid8cid13cid6cid7cid7cid1cid33cid33
cid1cid21cid18cid12cid1cid37cid1cid17cid1cid8cid13cid6cid7cid7cid1cid33cid33
cid1cid21cid18cid13cid1cid37cid1cid17cid1cid8cid13cid6cid7cid7cid1cid33cid33
cid1cid21cid18cid8cid9cid1cid38cid30cid25cid26cid4cid1cid33cid30cid25
cid1cid21cid18cid8cid12cid1cid38cid30cid25cid26cid4cid1cid33cid30cid25
cid1cid21cid18cid8cid14cid1cid38cid30cid25cid26cid4cid1cid33cid30cid25
cid1cid21cid18cid8cid15cid1cid38cid30cid25cid26cid4cid1cid33cid30cid25
cid1cid21cid18cid8cid8cid1cid38cid30cid25cid26cid4cid1cid32cid35cid41
cid1cid21cid18cid8cid11cid1cid38cid30cid25cid26cid4cid1cid32cid35cid41
cid1cid21cid18cid8cid10cid1cid38cid30cid25cid26cid4cid1cid29cid30cid28cid29
cid1cid21cid18cid8cid13cid1cid38cid30cid25cid26cid4cid1cid29cid30cid28cid29
cid1cid21cid18cid16cid1cid39cid35cid36cid1cid26cid34cid25cid24cid22cid36cid4cid1cid27cid22cid30cid32cid26cid25
cid1cid21cid18cid8cid7cid1cid23cid35cid39cid39cid35cid33cid1cid26cid34cid25cid24cid22cid36
cid10cid7cid7cid42cid18
cid21cid30cid33cid26cid1cid2cid31cid38cid3
Fig. 6. Detailed view of 2nd soak and thermal runaway for Test 1. 
ExperimentPermeability Testing 
Two different methods were used to measure 
the permeability of PBX 950223. The first utilized 
a traditional Fancher-style permeameter in which 
a  sleeve  of  PTFE 
is  compressed  around  a 
cylindrical  sample  of  explosive  Fig.  7.  A 
pressure of 30psig Helium gas is maintained on the 
upstream side the gas is forced to flow through the 
length  of  the  sample  and  the  mass  flow  rate  of 
Helium is measured on the downstream side using 
a Helium mass spectrometer.  
Figure  7.    Custom  Fancher-style  permeameter 
The  second  method  which  we  are  naming 
dynamic  pycnometry  is  a  modification  of  a 
standard  pycnometry  technique  used  to  measure 
internal  void  fraction  the  sample  is  placed  in  a 
cavity and the cavity is pressurized to 100psi. The 
gas slowly enters the sample bringing the internal 
pressure to equilibrium. At time zero the cavity is 
rapidly  vacuumed  down  and  sealed  as  the  gas 
flows out of the sample the pressure of the cavity 
rises. Using the solution to the diffusion equation 
in  cylindrical  coordinates  the  resulting  pressure 
curve can be fit with the diffusion coefficient and 
interconnected void fraction as fitting parameters.  
TATB  the  explosive  component  of  PBX 
9502  crystals  are  platelet  shaped  and  when 
uniaxially  pressed  will  preferentially  orient 
parallel to the pressing anvil. The resulting PBX is 
morphologically  anisotropic  which  might  be 
expected  to  result  in  an  anisotropic  permeability. 
machined  in  two  orientations  out  of  a  uniaxially 
pressed  billet.  The  axial  orientation  was 
machined  such  that  the  cylindrical  axis  of  the 
sample  was  parallel  to  the  uniaxial  pressing 
the  orthogonal  orientation  was 
machined  with  the  cylindrical  axis  normal  to  the 
pressing direction. 
Damaged  samples  of  PBX  9502  were 
prepared  by  soaking  them  at  a  temperature  of 
250C  for  two  hours  then  allowing  them  to  cool 
back  to  room  temperature.  Testing  on  damaged 
samples  was  performed  at  room  temperature  due 
to difficulties with adequate gas sealing at elevated 
ResultsPermeability Testing 
Flow rates obtained through both the pristine 
and damaged PBX 9502 were extremely low. We 
were  able  to  measure  non-zero  flow  rates  only 
because  of  the  extreme  sensitivity  of  the  testing 
apparatus the Helium mass spectrometer measures 
flow rates as low as 10-9 std ccsec. 
 In  all  tests  via  both  methods  flow  was 
discovered to be in a diffusive rather than viscous 
regime. Permeability coefficients are defined only 
for viscous Darcy flow when the mean free-path 
length  of  gas  molecules  is  on  the  order  of  the 
characteristic  void  size  flow  becomes  diffusiondominated and we measure diffusion coefficients.  
Table 2. Permeability results. 
Leak Rate SS atm-ccsec 
Using  the  Fancher  permeameter  we  obtained 
diffusion  coefficients  and  void  fractions  for 
samples  of  pristine  PBX  9502.  However  control 
tests with an impermeable steel plug revealed that 
flow rates through the PTFE seal itself were on the 
same  order  of  magnitude  as  the  PBX  9502.  In 
order  to  eliminate  the  error  associated  with  the 
PTFE  seal  the  dynamic  pycnometry  method  was 
the  dynamic  pycnometry 
method  we  obtained  diffusion  coefficients  and 
void  fractions  for  both  pristine  and  thermally 
temperature.  Favorable  agreement  between  the 
two methods for Sample 04 provided validation of 
the pycnometry method. Results for both methods 
are reported in Table 2.  Additional details may be 
found in reference 23. 
The  primary  purpose  of 
experiments was to examine the effect on violence 
when  IHE  charge  confinement  was  designed  to 
vent  product  gases  particularly  water  vapor.  In 
short  allowing  product  gases  to  escape  either 
continuously  throughout  the  entire  thermal  insult 
duration  or  suddenly  at  the  last  moment  by 
actuation  of  a  pressure-relief  burst-disk  did  not 
have  a  noticeable  effect  on  the  violence  of  the 
resulting  thermal  explosionall  were  relatively 
Another  effect  of  venting  however  can  be 
seen  in  Fig.  8  where  a  sealed  case  Test  6  is 
observed  to  cookoff  6229s  earlier  than  a  vented 
case Test 3 held at the same temperature.  
A similar comparison elucidating the effect of 
pressure is shown in Fig. 9 comparing Test 5 with 
Test 2 where both bucket assemblies were sealed 
and  heated  at  the  same  temperature  but  had 
different  free  volumes  for  the  product  gases  to 
occupy  hence  different  pressurization  rates  and 
magnitudes.  In  this  comparison  the  sealed  case 
cooked  off  13100s  earlier  than  the  high-volume 
Test 6 sealed high ullage
cid1cid16cid30cid34cid34cid21cid33cid34cid1cid17cid15
cid1cid14cid30cid35cid29cid20cid18cid32cid37cid1cid17cid15
cid1cid16cid30cid34cid34cid21cid33cid34cid1cid17cid15
cid1cid14cid30cid35cid29cid20cid18cid32cid37cid1cid17cid15
6229s difference in time-to-ignition
Fig.  8.  Comparison  of  Test  3  with  Test  6  reveals 
the effect of a vented case on time-to-ignition. 
cid17cid25cid28cid21cid1cid3cid26cid33cid4
Test 5 sealed low ullage
Test 2 sealed high ullage
cid1cid17cid32cid36cid36cid23cid35cid36cid1cid19cid16
cid1cid15cid32cid37cid31cid22cid20cid34cid39cid1cid19cid16
cid1cid17cid32cid36cid36cid23cid35cid36cid1cid19cid16
cid1cid15cid32cid37cid31cid22cid20cid34cid39cid1cid19cid16
cid19cid27cid30cid23cid1cid3cid28cid35cid4
Fig.  9.  Comparison  of  Test  2  with  Test  5  reveals 
the  effect  of  ullage  on  case  pressurization  and  its 
effect on time-to-ignition. 
In a paper that will be included elsewhere in 
these  conference  proceedings  Aviles-Ramos  et 
al.24  report  on  work  in  which  the  Hobbs  et  al.2 
decomposition model was applied to four of these 
Test  1256  and  successfully 
predicted  the  time-to-cookoff.  Their  simulations 
used as inputs both the boundary temperatures and 
the  observed  ballast  pressure  curve  rather  than 
predicting the observed pressure rise using any gas 
transport  model.  Future  work 
should address the source of pressure generation in 
order to improve the predictive capability.  
If  the  PBX  9502  is  impermeable  to  gas 
transport at the temperatures observed in this test 
then  we  identify  two  independent  pressures  of 
interest the ballast pressure which we measured 
in  the  bucket  experiment  and  an  internal  pore 
the  surface  skin  of 
pressure  which  is  not  communicated  to  the 
external  ballast  volume.  The  ballast  pressure 
which  develops  during  the  test  may  come  from 
two  sources  if  the  material  is  impermeable  the 
gas  generation  may  originate 
explosive. If the material is sufficiently permeable 
the gas may arise from a percentage of the entire 
bulk  of  IHE  decomposing  and  being  transported 
into the free volume. 
observed may be directly caused by the increased 
pressure  only  if  the  explosive  is  sufficiently 
communicated  to  the  interior  of  the  explosive. 
Indirectly  however  the  external  pressure  may 
affect  reaction  rates  in  the  interior  by  increasing 
the  reaction  rate  on  the  exterior  surface  of  the 
explosive. Increased reaction rates at the explosive 
surface  result  in  reduced  advective  heat  losses  to 
the  walls  of  the  vessel  thereby  shortening  the 
the  external  pressure 
To  further  complicate  the  situation  it  cannot 
be conclusively determined whether the mid-plane 
of  the  experiment  was  sealed  to  gas  flow  as  a 
result  of  the  thermal  expansion  of  the  explosive 
and  can  be  considered  interior  to  the  sample  or 
midplane and therefore the surface was exposed to 
the ballast pressure. 
Results from the permeability testing indicate 
that  pristine  and  thermally  damaged  PBX  9502 
impermeable.  Permeability 
cookoff modeling with PBX 9501 revealed that a 
permeability  constant  of  10E-17m2 
approximate  value  at  which  viscous  Darcy  flow 
begins to affect the cookoff outcome permeability 
of  10E-15m2  makes  a  significant  difference1011. 
We measured flow rates through both pristine and 
damaged  PBX  9502  that  were  so  low  that  a 
permeability  constant 
is  not  applicable.  The 
permeability of PBX 9502 damaged in situ and at 
the elevated cookoff temperature has not yet been 
performed.  However 
temperature  permeability  tests  of  PBX  9501  the 
material  was  even 
damaged material tested at room temperature9. 
Therefore  the  current  body  of  data  suggest 
that PBX 9502 is impermeable for most if not the 
entire evolution leading to cookoff. This indicates 
that  the  external  ballast  pressure  is  a  result  of 
surface  decomposition  rather  than  gas  transport 
from interior void spaces.  
time-to-cookoff  may  be 
If  we  assume  that  the  mid-plane  is  gas-tight 
and  isolated  from  the  ballast  pressure  then  the 
caused  by  a  pressure-dependent  rise  in  reaction 
rates  at  the  boundary  of  the  explosive.    The 
increased surface reaction decreases advective heat 
losses  to  the  metal  case  and  this  boundary 
temperature  effect  propagates  inward  ultimately 
increasing reaction rates at the center of the sample 
and reducing the time-to-cookoff.  
If  on  the  other  hand  the  mid-plane  is  leaky 
and  exposed  to  the  ballast  pressure  then  the 
location of ignition will be directly exposed to the 
increased  pressure  despite  the  impermeability  of 
the explosive.  Time-to-cookoff would be reduced 
as  a  result  of  a  pressure-induced  rise  in  reaction 
rates at the exact surface where ignition occurs. 
Another  series  of  experiments  is  planned  in 
which the permeability will be measured in situ as 
the explosive is taken up-to and through cook off. 
Six slow cookoff experiments were completed 
to evaluate the effects of vented confinement and 
gas  pressure  on  the  violence  and  time-to-ignition 
for  PBX  9502.  As  with  other  PBX  9502  cookoff 
experiments  the  thermal  explosions  from  this 
series  were  non-violent.  Pressure  however  was 
shown  to  have  a  significant  effect  on  time-toignition.  The  experiments  were  well  controlled 
producing  high-quality  spatially  and  temporally 
resolved  temperature  data  for  the  boundaries  and 
the  internal  mid-plane  of  the  IHE  charge.  These 
verification on intermediate scale assemblies. 
The  pressure  dependence  of  time-to-cookoff 
in the experiments reported here indicate that gas 
transport  plays  an  important  role.  Consequently 
the  evolving  permeability  of  PBX  9502  as  the 
material  proceeds  through  cookoff  should  be 
observed pressure dependence.  
to  better  understand 
Data  files  can  be  made  available  on  request. 
Please  contact  Matt  Holmes  mholmeslanl.gov 
This research was funded by Campaign 6 
WSEAT program at Los Alamos National 
Laboratory. Particular thanks to Dr. Eric Mas and 
Daniel Trujillo for supporting this work. Thermochemical  Calculations for Explosives with Polymeric Binders 
Leonard I. Stiel1 Ernest L. Baker2 Kathryn Hunt3 
1   NYU Polytechnic School of Engineering Brooklyn NY 11201 
2U.S. Army ARDEC Picatinny Arsenal NJ  07806 
3PM Ammunition U.S. Marine Corps Quantico VA  22134 
Abstract.  Analyses were conducted for several nonideal   explosives which  contain a 
cross-linked  polymeric  binder    such  as  hydroxyl-terminated  polybutadiene  HTPB. 
Calculations  with  the  thermochemical  equilibrium  program  Jaguar    for  formulations 
containing  cross-linked binders indicate that C-J velocities  calculated with completely 
reacted binder are generally lower than the corresponding experimental values.  Closer 
agreement  results  if  the  binder  is  treated  as  inert  in  the  calculations.    A  typical 
formulation is  PBXN-110 88  HMX 12 HTPB  for which the calculated detonation 
velocity with  the  inert  binder is in close agreement  with the experimental value. The 
slow-burning behavior of cross-linked polymeric binders has been suggested in previous 
        For  PBXN-110  and  several  other  explosives  with    HTPB  or  similar  binders 
comparisons  were  conducted  between    experimental  cylinder  velocities  and  values 
calculated  with  an  analytic  cylinder  model  and  constants  of  the  JWLB  thermodynamic 
equation of state generated by Jaguar.  In general  it is found that the cylinder velocities  
calculated with JWLB parameters utilizing  inert HTPB in Jaguar  are in closer agreement 
with    the  experimental  values    for  the  entire    expansion  range.    Some  reaction  of  the 
binder may occur upon expansion from the  C-J point depending on the temperatures and 
pressures attained for the formulation.  
       Analyses of detonation  and cylinder velocities  were also conducted for aluminized 
explosives such as PBXN-109  which utilize  cross-linked binders.  For the formulations 
evaluated best results for detonation velocities were obtained with the Jaguar procedures 
utilizing    both  inert  aluminum  and  inert  polymer  binder.      For  PBXN-109    further 
aluminum reaction is indicated at high expansions by comparison of calculated cylinder 
velocities with experimental values. 
     Cast-cured  polymer  bonded 
explosives.  In  these  systems    the  explosive    is 
enclosed    in  the  polymeric  binder  which  is  cured 
into a   hard  elastomeric rubber.  A typical binder  
for  this  purpose  consists    of  HTPB  hydroxy- 
terminated  polybutadiene  isocynates  to  facilitate 
cross-linking    of   the  polymer  and a plasticizer  
Table 1.  Experimental and calculated detonation velocities for HTPB systems 
DENSITY D EXPTL D REACT D INERT
such  as  DOA  dioctyl  adipate  to  improve  the 
mechanical  properties  of 
calculations  of  detonation  properties  of  these 
systems  with  a  thermochemical  equilibrium  code 
such  as  Jaguar1  anomalous  behavior  is    often 
the  calculated  C-J  values 
experimental  values. This is  contrary to the  usual 
behavior  for  nonideal  explosives  which    exhibit 
lower  C-J  velocities  than  the  calculated    values  
due to the diameter effect of the charge. In 1997 
Howard et al2 utilized an early version of Cheetah  
and    suggested  that  improved    agreement  could 
result  for explosives with polymeric binders such 
as HTPB if the polymer is considered  as an inert 
component  in  the  calculations.    In  this  study  this 
approach  has  been  re-examined    with  additional 
data  and  recent  computational  procedures.    In 
addition  the  accuracy  of  this  approach  at  other 
detonation  states  has  been  evaluated  utilizing 
cylinder  test  data  for  several  systems  including 
aluminized explosives. 
C-J Velocities for HTPB Explosives 
          Experimental  C-J velocities   for a number 
of  explosives  with  HTPB  binders  have  been 
compared  with  values  determined  by  Jaguar  for 
both   inert and reactive polymer components.   For 
the calculations for the inert polymer an equation 
of  state    resulting  from  Hugoniot  data  for  the 
unreacted  polymer23  is  utilized.  Howard  et  al2    
suggested  the    structure  C7.33H11O0.083  for  HTPB 
and  a  heat  of  formation  of  -0.2  kJ100g  polymer.  
Other  literature  heats  of  formation  of  the  binder2 
are in the range  -12 to 63 kJ100 g.  It should be 
recognized that the actual HTPB molecules in the 
initial  explosive  charge  are  subsequently  reacted  
with  the  curing  agent  and  plasticizer  to  form    a 
cross-linked    structure  before  detonation.    A 
composition  C7H10.65N0.063O0.223  and  heat  of 
formation  of -58 kJ100 g has been suggested   for 
the cured  HTPB binder4.  In this study  it has been 
found  that    only  slight  differences  result    for  the 
thermochemical calculations using alternate HTPB 
structures  and  heats  of 
properties  suggested  by  Howard  et  al2  have  been 
      The    polymer  bound  explosives  are  listed  in 
Table 1 along with the sources of the data major 
components  and  experimental  and  calculated 
detonation  velocities.      Most  formulations  also 
contain  small  quantities  of  additional  materials 
including  DOA  IDP  and  IPDI.    Most  of  the 
mixtures  considered    contain    large    amounts  of 
HTPB  at least 12 weight  per cent. 
     For  19  explosive  compositions    included  in 
Table  1  the  average  absolute  per  cent  error 
between  calculated  and  experimental  detonation 
velocities  is  2.12    for    inert  HTPB  and  5.34   
with  reacted  polymer.    It  has  been  found  that  in 
general  best  agreement  is    obtained  if  the  entire 
specified  binder composition HTPB isocycanate 
and plasticizer  is  considered as inert.   For ideal 
explosives  such  as  HMX  and  RDX  Jaguar  
detonation  velocities  are  typically  within  2  of 
experimental values.   
    For  several  Cl-20  systems 
percentages of HTPB11  lower errors are obtained 
with  reacted HTPB.  These results   indicate that 
HTPB may   react at the  C-J  point  if the oxygen 
balance is more favorable.     
       In Fig. 1 Hugoniot P-V curves for PBXN-110 
88  HMX  12    HTPB  for  an  initial  density 
1.67 gcm3  are plotted  for reacted and inert HTPB 
  It  can  be  seen  that  the  curve  for 
dissociated  binder  is  lower  than  the  curve  with 
inert  binder    and  that  the  resulting  Rayleigh  line  
tangent  to  the  inert  binder  curve    has  a    higher 
slope  and  therefore  higher  detonation  velocity 
than  the  corresponding    tangent  line  with  reacted 
binder.          This  is  similar  to  the  behavior  found 
previously  for  aluminized  explosives  for  which 
aluminum    are  higher  than  those  for  the    reacted 
  detonation  velocities  for 
Fig.1 Hugoniot curves for PBXN-110. 
Aluminized Explosives  
    For  a  number  of  aluminized  explosives 
detonation velocities calculated with  Jaguar  and the  
assumption  of  little  or  no  aluminum  reaction  are 
consistent with recent experimental values to within 
procedures utilized1213.  For most of the explosives 
studied the calculated detonation velocities decrease 
slightly in the range 0-25 aluminum reaction and  
are substantially lower for 100 reaction.     
       The  analyses  of  cylinder  test  data  indicate  that 
with  the  use  of  large  particles  of  50  micron  and 
higher  such  as  for  Picatinny  measurements  for 
PAX-3  an  HMX  based  explosive  with  20  weight 
per cent aluminum little or no reaction occurs for 
more  than  10  volume  expansions14.      Utilizing    an 
analytic  cylinder  model  best  agreement  with 
cylinder expansion tests for several explosives with 
small  aluminum  particles  was  obtained  by  the 
throughout the principal isentrope1213.   For BTNEN 
with 15 weight per cent aluminum Gogulya et al15  
found  that  highest  cylinder  velocities  are  obtained 
with  aluminum  particles  in  the  range  3-15  micron 
with  no  improvement  for  sub-micron  particles 
because of their increased aluminum oxide content.  
At  the  same  initial  density  considerably  lower 
cylinder  velocities 
resulted  with  150  micron 
      In order to account for the observed behavior of  
new  combined  effects  explosives  with  small 
aluminum particles a model has been  postulated in 
which the explosive expands through a reaction zone 
at constant detonation velocity until 100 aluminum 
reaction is attained.  At the zero aluminum reaction 
Hugoniot  the  aluminum  is  unreacted  while  the 
other gaseous and solid    C-H-N-O  products are in 
equilibrium.    For  the  partially  reacted  aluminum 
considered to be aluminum oxide is in equilibrium 
with the other C-H-N-O products.  This is assumed 
the  organic  reactions  are 
significantly  faster  than  the  time  required  for  the 
aluminum  to  react.    For  the  reaction  zone    the 
necessary Hugoniot and Rayleigh line relationships 
aluminum  Hugoniot  actually  lies  above  the  reacted 
aluminum   Hugoniots.     Therefore    the  minimum  
Unreacted Hugoniot energy 
Inert Al Hugoniot energy
Reacted Al Hugoniot energy 
Rayleigh line momentum 
the  zero  aluminum 
Fig. 2. Eigenvalue detonation. 
detonation velocity solution  occurs with the Raleigh 
Hugoniot  at  the  tangency  point.    Fig.  2  presents  a 
graphical depiction of the associated Hugoniots and 
Rayleigh line.  The eigenvalue detonation velocity16 
which  is  consistent  with  the  measured  detonation 
velocity  is  determined  by  the  tangency  of  the 
Rayleigh line to the unreacted Hugoniot curve. 
     Hugoniot  curves  for  PAX-30    an  HMX-based 
explosive with 15 weight   aluminum   at an initial 
density 1.909 gcm3  are shown in Fig. 3.  The point 
of  tangency  of  the  Rayleigh  line  with  the  zero 
aluminum reaction Hugoniot is at P  35GPa    and  
T  3119 K.  The calculated detonation velocity at 
this   initial point  is  8.43  kms  compared  to  the  
Fig. 3.  Hugoniot curves for PAX-30. 
experimental  detonation  velocity  from  Picatinny 
cylinder  tests  8.51  kms.    The  W-point  conditions 
where  the  Rayleigh  line  intersects    the    100  
aluminum  reaction  Hugoniot are P   25 GPa  and 
T    4235  K.    For  reference  the  never  achieved 
100 reaction C-J point has a calculated detonation 
velocity  of  8.06  kms.      Both  the  composition  and 
oxygen  balance    of  the  explosive  as  well  as  the 
appreciable    aluminum  reaction  will  occur      in  the 
aluminum      reaction  zone    before    isentropic 
      In order to investigate the effect of cross-linked 
polymer  binders  on  the  behavior  of  aluminized 
explosives          experimental  detonation  velocities 
for  several    explosives  containing  aluminum  and 
corresponding values calculated with Jaguar.  For 
the calculations both aluminum and   HTPB have 
been considered to be either fully  reacted or  inert.  
experimental  values  and  results 
calculations are included in Table 2.      It can be 
seen  from Table 2   that best agreement  with all  
the  experimental  detonation  velocities    result    if 
both  the  aluminum  and  polymer    components  are 
considered  to  be  inert  at    the  C-J  point.      The 
detonation  velocities 
assumption of both complete aluminum and HTPB 
reaction  are seen to be considerably lower than the 
corresponding experimental values. 
     For  several  aluminized  HMX  systems  with 
HTPB  Brousseau18 et al   found  little differences 
in        measured  detonation    velocities  using  either 
micron- size  or nano-aluminum particles.  For the 
comparisons  included  in  Table  2  for  micron-size 
aluminum  particles  the  calculated  values  with 
both inert  aluminum and HTPB are in very close 
agreement with the experimental values.  
Cylinder Velocity Comparisons 
comparisons  were  also  conducted  between  
experimental  cylinder  velocities  and  values 
calculated  with  an  analytic  cylinder  model  and 
constants  of  the  JWL  or  JWLB  thermodynamic 
equation  of  state  generated  by  Jaguar.  For  the 
JWLB  form  the  variation  of  the  P-V  curve  for 
isentropic expansion is represented in Jaguar as  
Table 2.  Experimental and calculated detonation velocities for aluminum -HTPB  systems
Al INERT AL REACTAl INERT AL REACT
corresponding experimental values.   
    Cylinder velocities for PBXN-110 88  HMX 
12 HTPB  at an initial density 1.67 gcm3 were  
calculated  with  Jaguar  and  the  analytic  cylinder 
model      for      reacted    and    inert    HTPB      and 
compared   to   values   obtained   with  a   reported    
JWL relationship6   based on experimental cylinder    
test        data        for          this        formulation.      As 
indicated in Fig. 4 the calculated values with  inert 
HTPB    binder  are  in  closer  agreement  with   
experimental  values  for  this  explosive    for  the 
entire    expansion  range.        Decomposition  of  the 
polymer may occur at the highest area expansions.      
Some reaction of the binder upon expansion from 
the    C-J  point  is  expected  depending  on  the 
temperatures and pressures attained.  
     Comparisons    of  calculated  cylinder  velocities 
to  experimental values  for DLE-C038 90  Cl20  10    HTPB    measured  at  Picatinny  Arsenal 
are  shown  in  Fig.  5.  This  system  has    a    much 
more  favorable  oxygen  balance  and  reaches  
higher initial temperatures and pressures  than   for  
Fig. 4. Cylinder velocities for PBXN-110. 
     4                                                                                              
17 HMXHTPB Al  452035
18 HMXHTPBAl    749.610
18 HMXHTPB Al   649.620
                                                                            
where   V  VV0 and V0 is the reference volume. 
The constant Z in Equation 2  is determined from 
the variation of the Gruneisen parameter O with V   
through the relationship  
     For  the  analytic  cylinder  model19    constant 
detonation  products  are  assumed  across  spherical 
surfaces  that  perpendicularly  intersect  the  cylinder 
inside wall.    Detonation energies and cylinder and  
Gurney  velocities  are  calculated 
relationships                                              
                                    
                             
                                                   
                              
                                                                    
                                                                             5 
For  ideal  explosives  such  as  HMX  cylinder 
velocities at 7 area expansions  calculated by these 
procedures   are    typically   within    2   of   the  
     6                                        
relationship20 for this initial density are consistent 
with    the  calculations  for    about  25    aluminum 
reaction and completely reacted polymer.   Davis 
et  al21    found  only    small    amounts  of  aluminum 
conversion in their calorimetric measurements for 
several aluminized explosives with HTPB. 
    Thermochemical  calculations  for  a  number  of 
explosives containing  HTPB  examined in this study 
show that in general best  agreement  for C-J velocities 
are  obtained  considering  the  polymer  as  inert    at  this 
previously.    Most  of  the  systems  considered  contain 
HMX or RDX as the explosive component   with a large 
proportion of HTPB.  Some results for  Cl-20  systems 
with low percentages of HTPB indicate that reaction of 
the polymer can initiate at  the C-J point if the oxygen 
balance  and  temperatures  and  pressures  attained  are 
     For aluminized explosives  with HTPB  evaluations 
with the available detonation velocities indicate that both 
the  metal  and    polymer  are  unreacted  at  the  initial  
measurement point.   This delayed aluminum  reaction is 
consistent with the behavior  shown for other  explosives  
with more energetic binders considered previously. 
cylinder  velocities  with 
experimental  data  for  several  systems  with  HTPB 
indicate  that  the  polymer  decomposition  can  be 
substantially  delayed 
the  expansion  process 
depending  on  the  composition  of  the  explosive  and 
initial  conditions  attained.      Analyses  of    cylinder 
velocities  for  the  aluminized  explosive  PBXN-109  
suggest  substantial  reaction  for  the  polymer  and  only 
partial aluminum reaction at high expansions. 
Fragment Impact Ignition Mechanism for Different HMX-based PBXs at high 
Dai Xiaogana b Wen Yushia  Zhang Haobina Liu Shijuna Huang Fengleib Li Minga 
aChina Institute of Chemical Materials CAEP Mianyang 621900 China 
bBeijing Institute of Technology Beijing 100081 China 
Abstract Shock initiation of heated explosive at pressure above 2GPa was investigated 
extensively in previous studies but the cases at input pressure below 2GPa were rarely 
reported  when  XDT  could  occur.  Impact  experiments  of  different  HMX  content  based 
PBX  at  high  temperature  were  performed  in  this  work.  Comparing  the  shock  initiation 
results its found that response mechanisms of impact response for heated explosive were 
more  complex  and  varied  at  low  pressure.  The  results  definitely  showed  that  impact 
ignition threshold velocity of heated explosive was not always decreased with temperature 
elevating  as  commonly  expected  and  it  varied  on  account  of  mechanical  properties 
change at 75C-130C. At the temperature between 190C and 200C there was a  
phase transition induced sharp rise of impact reaction level for PBX with a high HMX 
content. In contrast to that when the weight of HMX in PBX was less than 50 such 
effect of phase transition becomes insignificant.   
One  of  the  concerns  in  todays  work  with 
energetic  materials  is  their  safety  when  they  are 
exposed  to  extreme  or  unexpected  environmental 
conditions. Hazard scenarios can involve multiple 
stimuli such as heating and then fragment impact. 
Up to date the studies on the variation of impact 
safety at high temperature mostly focus on strong 
shock  ignition  of  heated  explosives  i.e.  shock 
pressure over 2 GPa. 
As Early as 1975Schwartz1 revealed that it 
needs  much  slower  fragment  to  ignite  TATB  at 
260C than that of room temperature. The study of 
Scheloske  et  al2  showed  that  the  energy  of  thin 
flyer  which  can  ignite  a  TATB  based  PBX  at 
260C  was  obviously  lower  than  that  of  room 
temperature by about 33 off for 1.8 gcm3 TATB 
pressed explosive and 50 off for LX-17. In 1993 
Dallman3  studied  the  relationship  between  the 
shock input pressure and the distance to detonation 
of  PBX-9502  and  LX-17  at  room  temperature 
75C  and  252C.  He  found  that  at  a  same  shock 
input  pressure  the  distance  to  detonation  at  the 
latter  two  temperatures  was  just  about  half  or 
one-tenth of the former. Afterwards a lot of studies 
on shock ignition of heated TATB or HMX based 
PBX  were  carried  out4-8  all  the  results  of  which 
indicated  that  the  distance  to  detonation  were 
shorten  after  heated.  The  shock  sensitivity  was 
enhanced  by  the  decrease  of  density  and  the 
increase  of  voids  because  of  temperature  rise. 
Voids  in  explosives  provide  more  resources  for 
hot-spots  under  shock  which  make  the  reaction 
much easier and faster. 
However in practical use explosives are more 
likely  to  encounter  input  pressures  below  2GPa 
such as several hundreds of MPa which involves 
XDT.  To  investigate  the  variation  of  response 
characteristic  under  the  stimuli  of  combination of 
heating  and  low  velocity  or  low  pressure  impact 
Dai  et  al9studied  the  response  of  PBX-2  by 
multiple stimuli. According to analysis it is found 
impact  safety  performance  can  be 
improved  to  some  extent  in  the  certain  heating 
temperature  range.  Up  to  now  the  studies  on  the 
explosives  safety  under  heat  and  mild  impact  are 
quiet  few  which  is  because  at  one  hand  the 
mechanisms  of  XDT  are  not  clear  on  the  other 
hand the response mechanisms of explosive under 
heat and impact are much more complicated.   
In  this  paper  we  carried  out  investigation  on 
the  impact  safety  variation  of  PBX  explosives  at 
high temperature. The impact safety characteristics 
of  several  HMX  content  based  PBXs  at  different 
temperatures  were  obtained.  Furthermore 
factors  and  the  response  mechanisms  of  HMX 
content  based  PBX  under  the  coupling  stimuli  of 
temperature and impact were analyzed. 
2 Experiments and simulation 
Here  we  have  designed  a  new  device  named 
XDW-test  which  can  simulate  fragment  impact. 
The  diagram  of  the  confined  explosive  specimen 
and embedded thermocouples were shown in Fig.1. 
The dimension of PBX sample is 50 mm50 mm 
and the cover plate is 3.5 mm thick and was made 
of Q235 steel. The dimension of projectile is 20 
mm20  mm  and  also  made  of  Q235  steel.  The 
projectile was launched by a gun which is shown 
in  Fig.2.  The velocity  of projectile was  measured 
by  high  speed  camera.  The  projectile  can  be 
accelerated  to  the  velocity  of  1000ms  by  gun 
powder. The electric heating belt is used to heat the 
confined  specimen  and  the  thermocouples  are  set 
to measure the edge temperatures of PBX sample. 
temperature  at  certain  heating  rate  and  then 
impacted  by  a  projectile.  Combined  effects  of 
heating impacting extrusion friction and shearing 
will  result  in  reactions  of  explosive  at  various 
levels.  The  safety  properties  of  explosive  before 
and after heated are assessed by the comprehensive 
temperature  histories  air  blast 
over-pressures  as  well  as 
specimen and confinement. 
Fig.1.Diagram of shell configuration for XDW-test 
1cover plate2bolt3retaining ring4
explosive5shell6thermocouple. 
Fig.2. Projectile launching gun. 
In  simulation  research  a  fragment  impact 
model  was  established  by  an  axisymmetric  finite 
element method which is given in Fig.3 a. In the 
figure  A  point  is  the  contact  center  between 
explosive  and  the  cover  plate.  The  stress  contour 
during impact was also provided in Fig.3 b. The 
stress  curves  of  A  point  under  different  velocity 
impact were calculated and given by Fig.4 which 
shown  that  under  the  impact  of  200ms-600ms 
velocities  the  peak  pressures  were  below  2GPa. 
Under  the  impact  of  700ms  velocity  the  peak 
pressure  reached  2.2GPa.  So  the  peak  pressures 
would  be  below  2GPa  when  the  impact  velocity 
a                                                      b 
Fig.3. Model of simulation and stress distribution. 
The  average  heating  rate  during  the  tests  is 
about 2Cmin to 3Cmin. For PBX-4 during the 
heating  process  between  the  temperatures  ranges 
of  90C-100C  there  are  obvious  temperature 
platforms which may be induced by absorption of 
heat and then softening. 
Fig.5.  Temperature  histories  of  samples  before 
Fig.4. Calculated results of impact pressures under 
various projectile velocities. 
In  order  to  obtain  the  response  of  different 
HMX content based PBXs during fragment impact 
tests  at  different  temperatures  four  specimens 
were  investigated  namely  PBX-1  containing 
95wt  HMX  PBX-2  containing  87wt  HMX 
PBX-3  containing  50wt  HMX  and  PBX-4 
containing  25wt  HMX.  The  binder  in  all  these 
formulations  is  basically  the  same. It  is  mainly 
composed of wax and fluororubber. 
3 Results and discussion 
3.1 The Temperatures of Surface of the Samples 
temperature  histories 
thermocouples  for  the  samples  surface  are  shown 
in  Fig.5.  Two  temperature  curves  in  each  picture 
correspond to different impact velocity test. 
203.5ms                      224.5ms                      227.1ms                      245.5ms 
a. room temperature 
230.1ms                        266.2ms                    291.1ms                      299.6ms 
237.4ms                    261.1ms                    271.5ms                          285.8ms 
Fig.6. Photographs of recover wreckages of PBX-1 and confinements.
3.2 The Analyses of Ignition Threshold Velocity 
The pictures of wreckages of PBX-1 PBX-3 
PBX-4 and their confinements are shown in Fig.6 
Fig.7  and  Fig.8.  The  pictures  of  wreckages  of 
PBX-2 and confinements are given in ref.9. From 
the pictures in Fig.7 and Fig.8 we can see that the 
impact  ignition  velocities  at  200C  tests  are  all 
lower than unheated tests. 
In Fig.6 for unheated PBX-1 when the impact 
velocity  is  not  higher  than  224.5ms  there  was 
only  a  small  indent  and  some  tiny  cracks  formed 
on  the  surface  of  PBX  and  the  confinement  still 
remained  intact  which  indicating  no  ignition 
occurred. When the impact velocity is higher than 
227.1ms  the  cylinder  confinement  was  torn  into 
indicating  violent 
When  the  PBX-1  was  heated  to  75C  at  the 
velocity of 299.6ms there was also only a small 
indent formed on the surface of sample no ignition 
occurred.  When  it  was  heated  to  135C  at  the 
velocity  of  261.1ms  there  was  also  no  ignition 
occurred. But when the velocity reached 271.5ms 
the bolts were snapped indicating slightly reaction 
occurred. At the velocity of 285.8ms the cylinder 
confinement  was  broken 
indicating  obvious 
350.9ms                      393.9ms                            415ms                            514.7ms 
a. room temperature 
319ms                                          357.4ms                                536.1ms 
Fig.7. Photographs of recover wreckages of PBX-3 and confinements. 
In Fig.7 for unheated PBX-3 at the velocities 
below 393.9ms there was also only a small indent 
formed  on  the  surface  of  sample  no  ignition 
the  velocity  of  514.7ms 
confinement was slightly wrecked suggesting low 
level reaction. When it was heated to 200C at the 
velocities  of  319ms  357.4ms  and  536.1ms  the 
snaps of the bolts and the breakaway of explosives 
from confinements indicating ignition occurred. At 
the  velocity  above  500ms  the  reaction  levels  of 
PBX-3 are the same no matter heated to 200C or 
257.3ms                  360.8ms                374.8ms                                528.8ms 
a. room temperature 
319.0ms                                  321.3ms                          536.1ms 
Fig.8. Photographs of recover wreckages of PBX-4 and confinements. 
In Fig.8 for unheated PBX-4 at the velocity of 
360.8ms the fragment was found embedded in the 
sample  and  the  confinements  were  not  damaged 
indicating no ignition occurred. At the velocities of 
374.8 ms and 528.8ms the samples were forced 
the  confinements  were  wrecked 
suggesting low level reaction. When it was heated 
to  200C  at  the  velocities  of  319.0ms  321.3ms 
and  536.1ms  ignition  occurred.  At  the  velocity 
above 500ms the reaction levels of PBX-4 are the 
same no matter heated to 200C or unheated. 
The  correlations  between  ignition  threshold 
velocity and temperature of several HMX content 
based  PBXs  were  shown 
in  Fig.9.  The  air 
over-pressure  under  different  velocities  of 
projectile  at  different  temperature  for  PBX-1  and 
PBX-2  were  given  by  Fig.10.  Fig.9  tells  that  the 
ignition  threshold  velocity  of  unheated  PBX-1  is 
between 224.5ms227.1ms while heated to 75C 
its ignition threshold velocity is larger than 299.6 
ms.  And  when  heated  to  135C  its  ignition 
threshold velocity is between 261.1ms271.5ms. 
The ignition threshold velocity of unheated PBX-2 
is  between  263.5ms269.9ms  while  heated  to 
75C  its  ignition  threshold  velocity  is  between 
316ms367ms.  And  when  heated  to  105C  its 
286ms298.3ms.  It  is  clear  that  when  heated  to 
threshold  velocities  of  PBX-1  and  PBX-2  both 
increased  and  the  air  over-pressures  decreased 
obviously  indicating  some  enhancements  of  their 
safety performances. 
temperature  around  100C 
Fig.9.  Correlations  between  ignition  threshold 
velocity and temperature. 
Fig.10. Air over-pressure under different velocities 
of  projectile  at  different  temperature  for  PBX-1 
Air over-pressure under different velocities of 
projectile  at  195C  and  200C  were  shown  in 
Fig.11. It tells that when heated to 195C PBX-2 
166.7ms295.7ms  the  over-pressure  were  close 
to  the  calibrated  value  of  fully  detonation.  For 
PBX-3  and  PBX-4  when  heated  to  200C  the 
ignition  velocity  thresholds  were  both  below 
319.0ms and their reaction levels were both lower 
than  PBX-2.  Combining  Fig.7  and  Fig.8  we  can 
see  that  when  the  impact  velocities  were  above 
500ms  the  reaction  levels  of  PBX-3  and  PBX-4 
were basically the same no matter heated to 200C 
or  not.  Hence  at  200C  the  contents  of  HMX  in 
PBXs affect the reaction levels of fragment impact 
account  the  effects  of  variety  of  mechanical 
properties during impact heated explosives. 
the  compressive  strength 
curves  under  various  temperatures  of  PBX-1  and 
PBX-2.  And  their  compressive  Modulus  curves 
under  various  temperatures  were  presented  in 
Fig.13.  The  compressive  strength  and  Modulus 
both  have  the  same  trend  namely  both  become 
lower  when  the  temperature  rises.  The  PBXs 
behave  as  viscous  flow  under  impact  when  the 
temperature  is  higher  than  80C.  At  95C  the 
compressive strength of PBX-1 and PBX-2 is only 
their  values  at  normal 
temperature  separately.  The 
indicates that the PBX is much easier to deform in 
a  higher  temperature.  The  much  lower  modulus 
and  strength  make  it  behave  almost  without 
strength  and  similar  to  a  pile  of  sand  aggregated 
under  higher  velocity  impact.  Thus  the  outer 
impact  energy  is  easily  converted  into  viscous 
flowing energy. As a result the impact safety will 
be improved due to the external mechanical stimuli 
are partly absorbed by the buffer of viscous flow in 
a relative higher temperature in our impact tests it 
means lower ignition threshold velocity. 
Fig.12. Compressive strength curves under various 
temperatures of PBX-1 and PBX-2. 
Fig.11. Air over-pressure under different velocities 
of projectile at 195C and 200C. 
3.3 Temperature Dependent Mechanical Property 
softening  phenomena  of  explosive 
between  the  temperatures  ranges  of  90C-100C 
shown in Fig. 5 suggests that its necessary to take 
spectrographs  of  phase  transition  were  obtained 
under  a  heating  rate  of  1Cmin.  These  XRD 
spectrographs  are  intended  to  study  the  effect  of 
HMX content and binders on phase transition and 
the effect of phase transition on the impact safety 
of PBXs. The scanning spots included 30C 190C 
193C 196C 199C 202C 205C 208C 211C 
214C  217C  220C  and  F30C.  F30C  denotes 
scanning  spot  after  cooling  from  195C  to  30C 
with  a  cooling  rate  of  about  2Cmin  -  3Cmin. 
There is 2 mins between completion of cooling and 
collection  of  XRD  data. Especially  for  PBX-2  3 
scanning spots of 223C 226C 229C are added. 
For  PBX-1  Fig.14.a  shows  that  the  curves 
below  and  including  193C  are  nearly  the  same 
indicating  no  phase  transition.  But  the  curve  of 
196C  changed  remarkably  which  suggests  that 
the  phase  transition  started  between  193C  and 
196C. The curve of F30C is similar with 220C 
because the  phase HMX can exist for some time 
after cooling down. 
For  the  same  reason  the  phase  transition  of 
PBX-2  started  between  193C  and  196C  the 
phase  transition  of  PBX-3  started  between  193C 
and  196C  the  phase  transition  of  PBX-4  started 
between 196C and 199C. 
Fig.13.  Compressive  Modulus  curves  under 
various temperatures of PBX-1 and PBX-2.   
3.4 Phase Transition 
The  phase transition affects the thermal 
decomposition and explosion observably 10 11. 
The  -HMX  is  the  most  stable  form  at  room 
temperature with maximum of energy the greatest 
density and the lowest sensitivity. When heated to 
a certain temperature -HMX will transform into 
-HMX with a higher sensitivity 10 11 as we stated 
in previous related work. When PBX-2 was heated 
to195C  or  higher  temperature  due  to  the   
phase transition of HMX the reactions were much 
easier  to  occur  and  the  reaction  levels  increased 
sharply9. According to the result of Smilowitz and 
Henson  12-14  this    to    phase  transition  in  PBX 
with  a  binder  made  from  estane  and  nitro 
plasticizer  at  atmospheric  pressure  occurred  at 
about  163C  much  earlier  than  that  of  highly 
purified crystals. They found that different binders 
had  various  influences  on  the  phase  transition 
temperature.  Binder  made  from  estane  and  nitro 
binders made from TATB wax and graphite have 
not been reported yet. In previous work9 we found 
that the binder made from TATB makes the phase 
transition  of  HMX  started  between  190C  and 
195C  much  higher  than  that  of  highly  purified 
crystals. As a result the phase transition processes 
and  temperatures  of  these  4  PBXs  cannot  be 
determined. In order to remove this uncertainty we 
investigated the phase transition of different HMX 
content based PBXs by XRD spectrograph and the 
results  were  shown 
in  Fig.14.  Their  XRD 
because  there  is  just  a  little  HMX  in  PBX-4.  By 
comparison of 4 figures above we can see that the 
contents  of  HMX  in  PBXs  affect  the    phase 
transition  processes  remarkably.  The  lower  the 
contents  of  HMX  the  higher  the  temperature  it 
needs to finish the phase transition. Comparing the 
results  of  impact  ignitions  when  the    phase 
transition  occurs  there  will  be  a  obvious  drop  of 
the  velocity  threshold  and  a  sharp  rise  of  impact 
reaction level for PBX with a high HMX content. 
In  contrast  to  that  when  the  weight  of  HMX  in 
PBX  was  less  than  50  such  effect  of  phase 
transition becomes insignificant.   
The  responses  of  PBX-1  and  PBX-2  change 
obviously  when  they  are  heated  to  135C  from 
room temperature. The trends of their changing are 
the  variation  of  mechanical 
enhancements of their impact safety performance 
such that the impact velocity threshold for ignition 
When  the  HMX  content  based  PBXs  are 
heated  to  around  200C  their  impact  velocity 
thresholds  of  ignition  are  obviously  lower  than 
those  at  room  temperature.  Different  content  of 
HMX in PBXs lead to different reaction levels. the 
PBX-2  with  87  HMX  responses  much  more 
violently at 200C than other temperatures nearly 
detonation.  For  PBX-3  and  PBX-4  whose  HMX 
contents are both below 50 the reaction levels at 
200C under 500ms or faster impact are identical 
with those at room temperature. Given the hint of 
the  importance  of  phase  transition  the  effects  on 
the  binders  were  also 
investigated  by  XRD  spectrograph  respectively. 
An  interesting  binder  controlled  temperature  shift 
of    phase  transition  of  HMX  was  identified. 
The  phase  transition  temperature  of  HMX  was 
lifted  from  the  range  of  180C-184C  in  highly 
purified  HMX  to  the  range  of  193C-196C  by 
adding 5wt or more binder made from TATB.   
We  greatly  appreciate  the  financial  support 
Industrial  Technology 
Development  ProgramNo.B1520132004  the 
Fig.14. XRD spectrograph of  phase transition 
of different HMX content based PBXs at different 
The  curves  of  Fig.14.a  and  Fig.14.b  are 
similar due to the close formulations if PBX-1 and 
PBX-2.  The  apexes  in  the  curves  of  Fig.14.c  are 
weaker than those of Fig.14.a and Fig.14.b which 
is  because  the  content  of  HMX  in  PBX-3  is 
observably lower than those of PBX-1 and PBX-2. 
In Fig.14.d the apexes of HMX are nearly all lost 
National  Natural  Science  Foundations  of  China 
U1330202  and  the  Science  and  Technology 
Friction-induced heating and ignition of PBX 9501 
Gary Parker Matt Holmes Eric Heatwole Larry Vaughan  Peter Dickson 
Los Alamos National Laboratory 
Los Alamos NM 87545. 
Abstract.  Previous  work  reported  at  the  14th  International  Detonation  Symposium  and 
elsewhere demonstrated conclusively that the primary ignition mechanism in drop events 
involving  large  charges  is  not  direct  frictional  heating  of  the  explosive  but  rather 
frictional interaction between grit particles that embed in the explosive at impact and the 
surface  being  impacted.  This  paper  reports  the  results  of  a  more  comprehensive  study 
comprising  a  new  highly-instrumented  experimental  test  platform  with  tight  control  of 
the significant variables grit aerial  density grit size grit  arrangement drop height and 
impact surface material hardness yield strength thermal diffusivity. The effects of these 
variables  on  both  the  ignition  and  propagation  of  reaction  are  explored.  Additionally 
evidence is presented to show that another functionally distinct mechanism exists in the 
absence  of  a  high-melting  point  target  surface  this  mechanism  is  reported  in  another 
paper in this Symposium.  
The  authors  have  previously  reported  the 
results  of  detailed  studies  of  the  mechanisms  of 
ignition  in  conventional  drop  and  skid  tests  on 
large pressed and machined charges1 as have been 
performed  at  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory 
Pantex and elsewhere since the 1970s. 
To  recap  in  the  LANLPantex  drop  test  the 
charge  is  suspended  by  a  winch  arrangement  and 
then dropped onto a 45 target surface in the skid 
test it is attached to a pendulum and swung so as to 
impact a horizontal target surface at either 14 or 
45. Traditionally the surface may be smooth steel 
or  other  metal  may  be  coated  with  another 
material  to  simulate  flooring  surfaces  found  in 
processing  areas  or  may  comprise  a  deliberately 
rough  surface  such  as  epoxy-bonded  sand  on 
metal.  The  intent  has  been  to  vary  drop  height 
thermal  conductivity  and 
specific heat capacity and the outcome is assessed 
according  to  level  of  reaction  from  no  apparent 
reaction to violent explosion or detonation. 
together  with  an  examination  of 
Among  other  questions  that  arise  from  these 
tests large variations in threshold drop height have 
been observed under nominally similar conditions 
experimentally  controlled  variables  led  to  the 
conclusion that the dominant ignition mechanism 
the  interaction  of  high-melting-points  solids  was 
not controlled at all. 
This concept is neither new nor controversial 
but  based  on  a  substantial  body  of  work  in  the 
areas  of  impact  friction  and  energetic  materials 
reaction kinetics dating back over 70 years. 
In  common  with  all  PBXs  PBX  9501  is  a 
weak  material  i.e.  it  exhibits  low  yield  stresses 
and at low impact velocities the strain rates are too 
low for enough mechanical energy to be deposited 
temperatures  even  with 
localization  processes  occurring  which  accounts 
for  the  relatively  high  threshold  impact  velocities 
for reaction in bullet or fragment impacts on bare 
charges  other  heating  mechanisms  dominate  in 
impact  on  cased  charges  of  well  over  100  m  s-1. 
For  comparison  a  drop  from  10  m  leads  to  an 
impact velocity of less than 15 m s-1. 
This  leaves  friction  as  the  only  credible 
heating  mechanism  but  to  get  ignition  on  the 
timescale  of  a  typical  impact  1    2  ms  requires 
temperatures of over 500 C 2. These temperatures 
are unobtainable by frictional interactions between 
the PBX and the target since when two materials 
interact  frictionally  the  maximum  temperature 
achievable  is  limited  to  the  melting  point  of  the 
lower-melting-point  material  involved3.  The  only 
frictional  mechanism  to  obtain  such  temperatures 
two  high-melting-point 
solids such as grit and a suitable target surface. In 
such an event the grit particles may embed in the 
explosive and be dragged across the target surface 
creating almost ideal hot spots in the PBX45. 
interaction  between 
reasonable  density  match  for  PBX  9501  but  its 
toughness  and  yield  strength  are  different.  A 
consequence is that cracks driven through the PBX 
as  a  result  of  the  impact  and  reaction-driven 
pressurization do not in general continue into the 
Delrin.  This  changes  affects  venting  which 
primarily  occurs  via  crack  intersection  with  free 
surfaces but the live-pole design was not intended 
to  explore  the  advanced  reaction  propagation 
regime  but  rather  to  examine  the  early  stages  of 
ignition and propagation that are the precursors to 
the  build  up  to  high  explosive  violent  reaction 
in  combination  with  a 
number  of  sub-optimal  design  aspects  of  the 
development  of  a  new  skid  test  apparatus  that 
allows  much  closer  control  of  the  impact  and  is 
instrumented  to  allow  collection  of  detailed  data 
on the impact and outcome. 
Figures 1 and 2 show the new LANL skid test 
apparatus. The design comprises 
1  Rigid-arm pendulum with an arm length of 
2  HE  cradle  that  provides  accurate  control 
orientation  and  releases  the  charge  at 
impact to allow free bounce 
3  Variable impact angle 
4  6-inch diameter target disk 
5  Optical access for high-speed photography 
both  normal  to  and  in  the  plane  of  the 
6  Load  cells  normal  to  and  in  the  plane  of 
7  Capability  to  use  full-size  charges  or 
reduced-size  charges  in  a  full-size  charge 
carrier live-pole hemi. 
Figures  3  and  4  show  the  design  of  the  livepole  hemi  and  carrier  system.  The  Delrin  is  a 
Figure 1. LANL skid test apparatus overview. 
The  primary  diagnostic  for  these  tests  was 
high-speed  video  imaging  typically  at  around 
25000 frames per second. For transparent targets 
images were acquired from both in the plane of the 
impact  surface  and  also  normal  to  the  impact 
surface  looking  through  the  target.  For  opaque 
targets only the in-plane imaging was used. 
Figure 2. Close-up view of charge carrier and 
Both  these  imaging  techniques  permit  the 
detection  of  much  lower  levels  of  reaction  than 
were  previously  observable  down  to  individual 
non-propagating  hotspots  and  figure  5  indicates 
the relative ranking between the directly observed 
levels of reaction in these tests and the 0  6 scale 
that  was  previously  employed  based  on  sound 
level and post-test inspection of the charge. 
The tests reported here were conducted from a 
range of drop heights on to 45 target surfaces of 
glass steel and aluminum with variable levels of 
grit contamination and grit particle size. Most tests 
were  conducted  with  a  random  grit  distribution 
obtained  by  sprinkling  dry  grit  onto  a  target 
surface  that  was  lightly  sprayed  with  a  dilute 
solution of sugar in water. Subsequent evaporation 
of  the  water  left  the  grit  held  in  place  by  a  very 
weak bond but sufficient to hold the grit in place 
on the inclined target plane. 
As  reported  previously  no  hot  spots  or 
ignition  sites  were  observed  when  HE  impacted 
clean  surfaces.  Out  of  81  tests  on  gritty  surfaces 
ignition  events  of  varying  extent  were 
coalescence of hotspots during the impact of PBX 
9501  on  sanded  glass  at  45.  There  is  no  flame 
propagation  into  cracks  and  this  represents  the 
lowest level of reaction reported indicated on the 
response  graphs  as  an  orange  square.  The  total 
duration of the impact event is approximately 1.5 
ms  and  this  has  been  found  to  be  relatively 
independent  of  drop  height.  As  the  drop  height 
increases  the  maximum  contact  area  increases 
resulting  as  expected  from  greater  deformation 
approximately  constant  over  the  range  of  drop 
Figure 3. Live-pole hemi design. 
Figure  7  illustrates  the  results  for  tests  on  a 
45  glass  target  showing  qualitative  extent  of 
reaction as a function of grit size and drop height. 
Ignition  sites  were  observed  with  drop  heights  as 
low  as  0.23  m  9  inches  and  grit  diameters  less 
than  50  m.  Extent  of  reaction  broadly  increased 
with both grit size and drop height over the ranges 
tested with at least one test resulting in a fireball 
but nothing that would be characterized as HEVR. 
Figure 5. Comparison of extent of reaction  reaction violence scales. 
Figure 7. 45 impact results on sanded glass 
Figure 6. Hot-spot generation and coalescence  
the lowest level of violence orange square during 
impact on sanded glass. 
Figure 8 similarly shows the results for drops 
onto  45  steel  targets  with  greater  variation  in 
response and some significantly violent reactions. 
The most violent with 800 m grit particles and a 
3.9 m drop height destroyed the delrin holder but 
fireballs  were  also  observed  with  grit  diameters 
less  than  50  m.  While  there  are  more  no 
reaction  results  indicated  than  for  glass  targets 
note  that  the  absence  of  optical  imaging  through 
the  steel  targets  may  mean  that  non-propagating 
ignition  sites  were  not  detected  i.e.  some  of  the 
green circles may in reality be yellow squares. 
Figure 9 shows the results for drops onto a 45 
aluminum  target.  No  propagating  reactions  were 
observed for any combination of grit size and drop 
Discussion and conclusions 
These  data  reinforce  previous  observations. 
The  first  and  most  obvious  conclusion  is  that 
without  grit  there  is  no  mechanism  to  produce 
viable hotspots. Direct frictional heating of PBXs 
is not a significant hazard. This is fully consistent 
with basic frictional theory and our knowledge of 
the thermochemistry of HMX mentioned above.  
A second also obvious conclusion is that the 
test outcomes in the presence of grit are consistent 
both  with  those  same  theoretical  frameworks  and 
with  previously  observed  accidents  and  tests 
including the observed scatter and outliers in most 
previous test data. 
Figure 8. 45 impact results on steel 
Figure 9. 45 impact results on aluminum. 
Two  quite  distinct  physical  processes  are  at 
1.  The  production  of  high-temperature  grit 
particles  due  to  frictional  interaction  with  a 
high-melting-point substrate 
Ignition  and  propagation  of  reaction  in  the 
Process  1  is  postulated  to  be  a  fairly  simple 
the  relevant  variables  grit  size 
morphology  physical  and 
thermal  properties 
target  physical  and  thermal  properties  impact 
speed and angle PBX mass and PBX physical and 
thermal  properties.  The  PBX  properties  are 
relevant  because  they  determine  how  the  grit 
embeds how much force is exerted on it and the 
heat transfer to the PBX. 
Only  the  initial  stages  of  process  2  are 
considered  here  and  it  is  a  much  more  complex 
process  involving  the  dynamic  response  of  the 
PBX following ignition.  
In terms of the response as a function of drop 
height only the aluminum target data support the 
hypothesis that the function is monotonic. Ignition 
sites  followed  by  flame  propagation  into  cracks 
the  necessary  precursor  to  reaction  build  up  to 
HEVR were observed over nearly the entire range 
of drop heights with glass and steel targets. 
Grit  size  test  data  also  indicate  that  all  sizes 
from around 30 m up to the maximum tested 800 
m  may  lead  to  ignition  and  propagation.  The 
lower  end  of  the  grit  size  range  is  particularly 
significant  in  that  grit  particles  of  that  size  are 
almost invisible to the naked eye at most making a 
surface  appear  dusty.  Note  that  the  detailed 
response  for  different  grit  sizes  as  a  function  of 
grit areal density has not yet been explored. 
The  three  target  materials  reported  here  all 
have  sufficiently  high  melting  points  to  lead  to 
viable  hot  spot  temperatures  when  interacting 
frictionally with grit but differ in considerably in 
mechanical  properties  and  thermal  diffusivity.  It 
has  often  been  postulated 
thermal  diffusivity  will  reduce  achievable  grit 
temperatures. Aluminum with the highest thermal 
diffusivity  of  69  mm2  s-2  results  in  the  fewest 
ignition  sites  while  steel  14  mm2  s-2  and  glass 
0.8 mm2 s-2 seem to yield similar results despite 
their  disparate  properties.  However  microscopic 
examination  of  the  surfaces  after  testing  also 
mechanism may be significant. 
As shown in figures 9 and 10 grit interaction 
with  metal  targets  leads  to  significant  gouging  of 
small  metal  fragments  that  will  be  heated  by  the 
plastic  work  expended  to  produce  them.  These 
may  themselves  act  as  viable  hot  spots    a 
mechanism  not  present  in  gritglass  interactions. 
Due  to  the  much  higher  yield  stress  of  steel 
relative  to  aluminum  the  steel  fragments  may  be 
expected  to  be  hotter  compounding  the  thermal 
transport  considerations  and  leading  to  more  and 
Figure 11. Low and high magnification 
micrographs of the HE surface following glancing 
impact on sanded steel. Steel chips covering the 
sand particles have been scraped free by the 
gouging action of the embedded sand. The blue 
arrow indicates the direction of travel of the HE. 
The relative contributions of these effects are 
hard  to  determine  but  the  overall  trends  suggest 
that  they  each  contribute  to  some  extent.  More 
clearly  we  can  conclude  that  aluminum  surfaces 
are much less likely to cause ignitions in the drop 
height and grit size regimes explored here. 
reported  here  provide 
conclusive  evidence  of  a  significant  mechanism 
for  explosive  ignition  during  a  drop  event.  The 
authors have previously hypothesized that a highmelting-point  target  material  is  a  prerequisite  for 
hotspot  generation  and  that  one  fundamentally 
sound  mitigation  strategy  is  to  ensure  that  all 
melting  points.  Previous 
impacts  on  such  surfaces  in  the  presence  of  grit 
did  not  produce  hotspots.  However  further  tests 
with  higher  areal  grit  densities  demonstrate  that 
this hypothesis must be rejected. Figure 12 shows 
an  image  from  a  high-speed  sequence  of  a  drop 
test on sanded Delrin a polymer with a relatively 
impact  surfaces  have  suitably 
A full description of these tests together with 
an  analysis  of  the  physical  processes  involved  is 
in  a  companion  paper  at 
Figure 10. Low- and high-magnification 
micrographs of a steel surface that was covered in 
sand during a glancing impact. The blue arrow 
indicates the direction of travel of the HE. 
Figure 12. An image of the result of  an impact of 
PBX 9501 onto sanded Delrin.  
This  work  was  supported  by  the  Surety 
Progam at Los Alamos National Laboratory. 
Equation-of-State and Shock Homogeneity of IMX-101 and IMX-104 
Michael D. Furnish Seth Root and Phil Samuels 
Dept. 1646 MS 1195 Sandia National Laboratories 
PO Box 5800 Albuquerque NM 87185-1195 
Picatinny Arsenal NJ 07806-5000 USA 
Abstract.  IMX-101  and  IMX-104  are  relatively  new  IM  Insensitive  Munition 
explosives  intended  to  replace  TNT  and  Composition  B  however  little  fundamental 
equation-of-state data exists for these explosives  We report the results of a program of 
planar-impact  experiments  on  these  two  explosives  initially  loaded  to  stresses  ranging 
from 4 to 16 GPa.  The primary diagnostic velocimetry both VISAR and PDV was used 
to track the  velocity  history  of the downstream interface  between the explosive  sample 
and  a  sodium  chloride  window.    Each  experiment  included  multiple  samples  with 
thicknesses ranging from 3 to 12 mm to allow establishing equation-of-state properties of 
the unreacted material  and run-to-detonation distance as a function of loading.  Selected 
tests used spatially resolved interferometry line-imaging VISAR or multiple probes to 
monitor  the  spatial  dependence  of  the  wave  arrival  at  the  window  interface  giving 
information about the heterogeneity of the wavefront in IMX-104. 
A  key  goal  of  munitions  improvement  is 
reducing  the  likelihood  of  accidental  detonation.  
To  this  end  the  insensitive  munitions  IMX-101 
and  IMX-104  have  been  developed  as  respective 
substitutes  for  TNT  and  Composition  B.      The 
present  study  focusses  on 
the  pre-detonation 
equation of state of these materials although runto-detonation is also investigated. 
IMX-101  is  composed  of  24-Dinitroanisole 
DNAN Nitroguandidne NQ and 3-Nitro-124triazol-5-one  NTO.    IMX-104  is  composed  of 
DNAN  NTO  and  RDX. 
  Selected  physical 
properties  of  these  materials  are  compared  with 
corresponding  properties  of  TNT  and  Comp-B  in 
Table  1.    Selected  properties  of  IMX-101  IMX104  TNT  and  Comp-B.  Detonation  velocity  is 
from cylinder tests. 
The  present  IMX-101  and  IMX-104  samples 
contain internal voids up to a few mm in size.  The 
average  porosity  of  the  IMX-101  in  this  study  is 
3.0  that  of  the  IMX-104  is  1.4. 
the  possibility  of  data  variability 
depending  on  void  location  relative  to  the  points 
monitored by the experiment diagnostics. We have 
not radiographed the present samples. 
The primary properties of interest for the 
IMX-101 and IMX-104 discussed in the present 
paper include the unreacted Hugoniots and loading 
waves material heterogeneity and the run-todetonation properties.  The physical properties of 
the detonation products will be further addressed 
in a later paper together with additional run-todetonation results. 
These  experiments  utilize  the  powder-driven 
gun range at Sandias STAR Facility 89 mm bore 
impact  velocities  0.5  -  2.2  kms  and  VISAR 
velocimetry diagnostics.  This affords a supported 
shock  wave  by  contrast  with  the  Taylor  wave 
produced by explosive plane-wave lenses. 
In recent  years the value of  placing  multiple 
samples  on  a  single  target  has  become  apparent 
Furnish et al.1.  This allows the comparison of 
responses of different samples to identical loading 
for  example  providing  waveform 
from  which  material 
strength properties may be deduced.  Of particular 
interest  here  is  the  comparison  of  IMX-101  or 
IMX  104  samples  of  different  thicknesses  driven 
at stress levels of 4 - 15 GPa.  In this stress region 
the loading wave is discontinuous and no strength 
information  is  directly  available.    However  the 
wave  speed  may be  measured at different sample 
thicknesses giving not only Hugoniot information 
but also information about the run-to-detonation at 
the experiment pressure. 
The  initial  shots  were  designed  as  shown  in 
Fig. 1.  There are 4 IMX samples of thicknesses 3 
6  9  and  12  mm  each  19  mm  in  diameter  at  90 
degree  positions  22.9  mm  from  the  center.    Each 
has  a  LiF  or  NaCl  window  mounted  to  the  rear 
surface.    A  LiF  window  at  the  center  is  mounted 
flush with the impact surface and serves as a timeof-impact diagnostic.  PDV2 was used to monitor 
the  motion  of  the  interface  between  the  NaCl 
buffer  and  window 
for  each  sample  and 
VISAR3 monitors the motion of the front surface 
of  the  LiF  window  at  the  target  center.    Selfshorting  pins  mounted  adjacent  to  each  IMX 
sample  at  a  41.27  mm  radius  provide  impact  tilt 
information allowing the calculation of a position
dependent impact tilt correction to the impact time 
defined by the central LiF window. 
The  IMX  samples  19  mm  diameter  were 
glued  into  LexanR  rings  to  reduce  any  edge 
effects inasmuch as the shock impedance of Lexan 
is fairly close to that of the IMX. 
Fig. 1.  Configuration of all shots except 104-3 and 
These  windows  are  NaCl  for  test  101-5  the 
buffers are also only used for 101-5. 
In  view  of  results  of  chemical  compatibility 
tests  the  present  shots  were  assembled  using 
Epotek 301 adhesive a clear binary epoxy with a 
compatibility  does  not  extend 
For the final two shots a new design was used 
capitalizing  on  the  availability  of  a  19-beam 
VISAR system at the STAR Facility.  This system 
together  with a set of  LeCroy WavePro digitizers 
triggered by a common trigger and also recording 
a  common  timemark  allows  the  recording  of  19 
time-correlated  velocity  histories. 
developed  by  National  Security  Technologies 
LLC4 improving on an earlier 7-beam design by 
Barker5.    The design is show in Fig. 2. 
Fig. 2.  Configuration for shots 104-3 and 104-4. 
This  configuration  used  6  flush-mounted  LiF 
windows to map the impact timing fit to a surface 
t  ax  by  c  dr2   
The  motion  of  the  impact  surfaces  of  these 
LiF  windows  was  monitored  with  channels  from 
the  same  VISAR  system  used  to  monitor  the 
motion of the IMX sample rear surfaces allowing 
shock transit times to be determined to 1  2 ns. 
NaCl  windows  were  used  instead  of  LiF 
allowing  a  better  mechanical  impedance  match 
with the IMX. The impedance match the product 
of initial density times zero-pressure sound speed 
determines  the  strength  of  release  or  reshock 
waves sent back into the sample from the window. 
Although  the  figure  shows  line  VISAR  used 
on the 9 mm thick sample point VISAR was used 
there on the second shot. 
The primary information available from this 
x  Hugoniot  data  derived  from  shock  transit 
times  initial  sample  density  impact  velocity 
and the Hugoniot of the impactor 
x  Reshock  data  derived  from  the  window 
Hugoniot  and  the  post-shock  velocity  of  the 
samplewindow interface 
x  Run-to-detonation distance deduced from the 
wavefront arrival times for each thickness. 
x  Sample  heterogeneity  deduced  from 
spatial variation in the above data. 
A total of 5 experiments were conducted with 
IMX-101 samples and 4 with IMX-104.  Of these 
all utilized the geometry of Figure 1 except for the 
last  two  IMX-104  experiments.    Key  parameters 
are summarized in Table 2. 
VISAR  Cu 12.7 mm  1.849 
VISAR  Cu 12.7 mm  2.034 
Table 2.  Shot parameters 
Setup number corresponds to fig. numbers 
Refers to the on-sample interferometry.  Flush 
window spots were VISAR throughout. 
1.8 mm NaCl buffer used and NaCl windows 
 Line VISAR on 9 mm sample 
timing  and  samplewindow 
Hugoniot  values  were  determined  via  the 
shock  transit  times. 
  This  was  established 
explicitly  for  shots  101-5  104-3  and  104-4  in 
which  a  common  VISAR  timebase  was  used  for 
velocimetry.    For  shots  101-1  through  101-4  a 
timebase  could  not  be  established 
between the central LiF window VISAR and the 
other samples PDV so the timing corrected for 
tilt  as  indicated  by  the  tilt  pins  was  adjusted  so 
that  the  wavespeeds  for  the  3  and  6  mm  thick 
samples were equal.  The procedure for shots 1041 and 104-2 was similar.  The results are listed in 
Table 3 and plotted in Fig. 3.  Initial densities were 
1.63  gmcm3  for  IMX-101  and  1.735  gmcm3  for 
Table 3.  Hugoniot values. UP is particle velocity 
US is shock velocity and P is axial stress. 
Waveforms and Reshock States 
Waveforms  for  the  first  four  IMX  101  shots 
are shown in Fig. 4.  The two lower-velocity shots 
have  relatively  level  waveforms  following  the 
initial loading although it is interesting that more 
features  are  seen  on  101-1  than  on  the  highervelocity 101-2.  It is unlikely this is due to sample 
heterogeneities because similar behavior is seen on 
all four samples in each shot excluding the 12 mm 
in  101-2  which  did  not  produce  a 
measurable PDV waveform.  The highest pressure 
shot  101-4  shows  a  sharp  initial  peak  on  the  9 
mm  sample  waveform  that  resembles  a  von 
  However  wavespeed  data 
discussed  in  more  detail  later  suggests  that 
detonation is not occuring in this sample. 
Fig. 3.  Hugoniot states for IMX-101 and 104. 
Comp-B points are from 6-8 TNT trendline is 
The  final  IMX-101  test  which  used  NaCl 
buffers 325 ns wave transit time and windows 
produced  the  waveforms  shown  in  Fig.  5.    This 
test  may  better  represent  the  in-situ  waveforms 
than tests 101-2 through 101-4 because NaCl is a 
closer  impedance  match  for  IMX-101  and  IMX104  than  is  LiF  shown  later  in  Fig.  9.    The 
waveforms  from  the  6    12  mm  samples  in  this 
16.5  GPa  test  show  a  general  relaxing  following 
typical  detonation 
profile.  However in the last section of this paper 
we will see that the calculated wave speeds based 
on time of arrival suggest detonation did occur. 
The  first  two  of  the  IMX-104  tests  produced 
the waveforms shown in Fig. 6.  These again used 
LiF  windows  without  buffers  and  the  resulting 
waveform features are similar to those observed on 
the IMX-101 shots with LiF windows.  The initial 
velocity pike on the 12 mm sample in shot 104-2 
8.8  GPa  is  unlikely  to  be  a  detonation-related 
feature because the wavespeed does not increase to 
near  the  7.5  kms  expected  for  a  detonation 
wavefront in IMX-104. 
improved  design  shown  in  Figure  2.    Test  104-3 
produced the waveforms shown in Fig. 7. 
This  test  used  several  VISAR  probes  on 
different spots for the 3 and 12 mm thick samples 
Fig. 4.  Waveforms measured by PDV for shots 
101-1 through 101-4 design in Fig. 1. 
Fig. 6.  Waveforms measured by PDV for shots 
104-1 and 104-2 design in Fig. 1. 
Fig. 5.  Waveforms measured by VISAR for shot 
101-5 design in Fig. 1. 
Fig. 7.  Waveforms measured by VISAR for shot 
104-3 design in Fig. 2 14.6 GPa initial loading. 
as  well  as  a  line-imaging  VISAR  on  the  9  mm 
sample.    Slight  variations  in  the  waveforms  from 
one spot to another were observed. For the 3 mm 
sample  in  which  the  three  spots  were  evenly 
spaced  on  a  7.62  mm  diameter  circle  these  are 
probably  related  to  sample  heterogeneities.    For 
the 12 mm sample the three spots on a 10.16 mm 
diameter circle appear to show spatial variation in 
detonation properties.  That detonation occurred in 
this sample is discussed below. 
As  shown  in  Fig.  2  6  small  LiF  windows 
were  mounted  flush  with  the  impact  plane  and 
monitored  by  VISAR  to  establish  the  impact 
timing as a function of position fit to a functional 
form  txy  axbyCDr2.  The fit had an RMS 
value  of  1.4  ns  and  indicated  an  unexpectedly 
large 25 ns  0.045 mm concave bowing of the 
impactor.  The diagnostics on the earlier tests were 
not sensitive to this radial dependence. 
The line VISAR data showed only  the initial 
arrival  on  the  9  mm  sample  this  arrival  did  not 
show  any  spatial  variation  except  a  slight  tilt 
consistent with the impact geometry.  The surface 
may have so degraded after impact that the high fnumber return optics did not capture the reflected 
light.  This  diagnostic  was  replaced  with  a  singlepoint VISAR for the remaining shot. 
The  waveforms  for  test  104-4  are  shown  in 
Fig. 8.  Again some  spatial variation is observed 
for the samples where multiples probes were  used 
2 each for the 3 and 6 mm samples and 3 for the 
12 mm sample.  As noted below there is wave- 
Fig. 8.  Waveforms measured by VISAR for shot 
104-4 design in Fig. 2 15.8 GPa initial loading. 
speed evidence for detonation beginning with the 6 
Since  the  windows  have  a  higher  shock 
the  IMX-101  and  IMX-104 
samples  the  samples  were  reshocked  when  the 
loading wave reflected off of the interface beween 
the    sample  and  the  window.    The  resulting 
reshocked  states  may  be  calculated  from  the 
interface  following initial loading and the known 
Hugoniots of the window materials.  These states 
are  plotted  in  Fig.  9  and  enumerated  in  Table  4.  
We are still trying to understand why some of the 
IMX-104 reshock paths are vertical in this figure.  
the  material  velocity  of 
Fig. 9.  Reshock paths for all experiments. 
Table 4.  Reshock values.  UPRS is projected 
forward from UPH vs. backward in Fig. 9. 
Wavespeeds and Run-to-Detonation 
results  above  used 
wavespeeds  from  the  3  mm  and  6  mm  thick 
samples.    It  is  also  interesting  to  tabulate  the 
wavespeeds  observed  as 
progresses  through  different  samples.    Consider 
the sketch in Fig. 10.  The times-of-arrival of the 
loading wave at 0 3 6 9 and 12 mm are known 
for  each  experiment  with  some  missing  values.  
It is possible to use the arrival time differences to 
deduce  the  wavespeed  as  the  wave  travels  e.g. 
These  results  are  shown  in  Table  5  below.   The 
wavespeed  of  detonating  IMX-104  is  known  as 
kms.   For  the  101  the  tabulated  wavespeeds 
indicate  velocities 
detonation  velocity.  As  noted  earlier 
individual waveforms do not show clear evidence 
of detonation.  However the wave speeds increase 
to  match  the  detonation  velocity  observed  in 
cylinder tests Table 1 suggesting that detonation 
may have occurred between 9 and 12 mm for shot 
101-4 at 15.8 GPa and between 6 and 9 mm in shot 
101-5 at 16.5 GPa.  The IMX-104 appears to have 
detonated at 14 GPa 101-3 at roughly 6 mm run 
distance and at 15.8 GPa at between 3 and 6 mm 
run distance.  Using the 19-channel interferometer 
with  more  finely  spaced  sample  thicknesses  is 
needed  to  resolve  the  run-to-detonation  distance.
Average wavespeeds over intervals noted kms 
Fig.  10.    Schematic  of  usage  of  different  sample 
Table 5.  Wavespeeds observed for various intervals. Grit-Mediated Ignition of Polymer-Bonded Explosives on Low-Melting-Point
Eric Heatwole Gary R. Parker Matthew D. Holmes Jake Gunderson and Peter Dickson
Group WX-6 HE Thermal and Mechanical Response Team
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Abstract. Frictional heating of high-melting-point grit particles in glancing impacts of
polymer-bonded explosives PBX is considered to be the major source of ignition in serious accidents involving dropped or otherwise mishandled explosives. It has been accepted
knowledge since a series of experiments by Bowden that the lowest temperature melting
point of two frictionally interacting surfaces will cap the maximum temperature reached.
This offers a seemingly easy way to mitigate the dangers of glancing impacts by using
surfaces andor barriers with melting points below the ignition temperature of the PBX
that is the temperature necessary to form a Frank-Kamenetskii critical hot spot as a function of impact duration. However a recent series of skid testing experiments has shown
that ignition can occur on gritty low-melting-point surfaces and can propagate to a violent
reaction. The mechanism thought to be responsible for ignition on low-melting-point surfaces is grit-grit collisions which can release enough heat to lead to ignition of the PBX.
Experimental evidence will be presented and includes impact experiments onto single grit
particles where collisions were not possible impacts onto heavily sanded surfaces where
grit-grit collisions were possible post-mortem microscopy showing collision sites from impacts onto heavily sanded targets and probabilistic arguments built from a series of simple
assumptions indicating that at the areal grit-coverage density tested grit-grit collisions are
One of the major causes of serious accidents involving energetic materials is due to oblique impacts from dropped or mishandled consolidated explosives. It is a common misbelief in the explosives
community that the ignition in these events is due to
one of two mechanisms heating caused by mechanical deformation of the explosive or the frictional
heating from the explosive directly interacting with
the impacted surface. However neither of these
mechanisms can be responsible for the ignition in
the time frame of the impact typically around 1
ms. Above a minimum ignition temperature the
time-to-ignition t for HMX-based explosives is directly related to temperature by logt  1T1. In
order for ignition to occur on the timescale of an impact event temperatures in excess of around 600C
are required. The lower temperature hot spots will
cool and quench when the surfaces lose contact on
Since PBXs are weak solids it requires relatively
little energy to deform plastically. This temperature
is not accessible from mechanical deformation since
the strain rates involved in any reasonable dropped
explosive scenarios are too low to give rise to the
required temperature for ignition.
The maximum temperature reached by the frictional heating due to the interaction between explosive and the clean substrate will be capped by the
melting point of the explosive2. For HMX-based
explosives this is approximately 260C which is
too low to lead to critical hot spot formation. Multiple skid tests on clean surfaces have been performed
and ignition has never been observed when the surface is free of grit3 4.
The culprit for ignition on high-melting-point
surfaces is the presence of high-melting-point grit
particles on the impacted surface5. In glancing impacts these grit particles become entrained in the
explosive and are dragged across the surface leading to frictional heating of the grit with sufcient
velocity and normal force the grit heating can lead
to critical hot spots. An example is a dropped PBX
charge impacting a dirty concrete oor the grit on
the oor is dragged over the concrete which leads
to high enough temperature to ignite the explosive
before the charge bounces. It has been thought that
a simple way to mitigate this hazard was to use lowmelting-point surfaces in explosives handling areas.
However in a recent series of skid tests using PBX
9501 it was shown that ignition can occur on heavily sanded low-melting-point surfaces and propagate to violent reaction346.
Using the Los Alamos National Laboratory rigidarm pendulum ignition was observed on a variety
of low-melting-point surfaces with grit sizes from 1
mm down to 75 m. These ignitions not only included luminous hot spot formation but propagated
to more violent reactions including crack formation
and reballs. See Fig. 1.
Rather than a grit-substrate interaction being the
dominant mechanism for ignition it is thought that
grit-grit collisions are responsible for ignition on
low-melting-point surfaces. When the impacted
surface has a similar hardness to the PBX some of
the grit becomes embedded in the surface as well
as in the PBX which as the PBX slides across the
surface allows for the possibility of a grit particle
Fig. 1. Still frame from high-speed video showing
the polycarbonate-PBX interface during an oblique
impact into a stationary heavily sanded polycarbonate target. Ignition with ame spread into a crack
is seen. The arrow indicates the direction of travel
embedded in the PBX to collide with a stationary
particle. While the exact grain-scale mechanism
for ignition due to collisions remains unclear the
collisions can lead to high enough temperatures to
cause the formation of Frank-Kamenetskii critical
hot spots7 This hypothesis is supported by the following evidence 1 impacts on a single grit particle
lead to ignition on high-melting-point surfaces but
not on low-melting-point surfaces 2 no ignition
was observed in experiments on soft low-meltingpoint surfaces where the grit embeds preferentially
in the substrate 3 post-mortem microscopy of the
substrate indicates the presence of a grit-grit collision in the region of ignition 4 statistical arguments show that grit-grit collisions are extremely
likely for all experiments where ignition was observed.
The oblique impact experiment frequently referred to as a Skid Test uses a rigid-arm pendulum Fig.2 to deliver explosive charges onto an
impact surface with accurate control of drop height
and orientation. Figure 3 shows the so-called live
1553
Fig. 3. Showing DelrinTM holder with PBX 9501
tact interface along the normal axis was possible
with use of a turning mirror positioned underneath.
A high-speed video camera up to 25000 frames
per second allowed the contact area to be measured and luminous ignition sites to be observed
as the impact progressed Fig. 5. For the opaque
targets the high-speed video camera was zoomed
in from the side allowing ignition to be observed
from the smoke and light from the reaction. The
surface of the target was randomly covered with
sieve-cut quartz sand at an areal coverage density
of 1.52.0105 particles m2. Lastly control trials were performed on carefully cleaned surfaces.
For a more in depth discussion of the experimental
details please see the report by Gary Parker et al.3
Experimental Results and Discussion
Using the rigid arm pendulum described previously skid testing was performed on the following low-melting-point polymers polycarbonate
LexanTM polyurethane AdipreneTM and acetal
DelrinTM. Also tested were polymers that are
commonly used as ooring vinyl StaticworxTM
and rubber NoramentTM and StaticworxTM. Except for the polycarbonate different hardnesses of
each material were tested and in the case of the
ooring materials different thicknesses were tested
as well. For an overview of the materials used see
Table 1. Five grit-size ranges were tested 500-1000
m 250-500 m 150-250 m 75-150 m and  75
m. The majority of drops were performed at the 8foot level and with an impact angle of 45. The exception was polycarbonate which was tested with
drop heights between 8 feet and 6 inches and with a
14 impact angle as well as 45. For an overview
of the results see Fig. 4.
Fig. 2. The LANL rigid-arm pendulum. A 15-ft.
arm swings to deliver the PBX live-pole hemi into
contact with a rigidly mounted target surface at the
bottom of the swing arc.
pole hemi a two-part system consisting of a hemisphere of DelrinTM plastic into which a tapered
cylinder of PBX 9501 is inserted. This system assures the explosive-containing pole is oriented appropriately for well-controlled impacts.
For the tests with clear polymers the impact target was a glass disk 6 inch dia.  1 inch thick with
a 18th to 14 inch thick layer of polymer bonded to
the glass top surface with transparent epoxy. For the
tests with opaque polymers the target was a steel
disk 6 inch dia.  1 inch thick with the polymer
bonded with epoxy to the top surface of the disk.
The target was rigidly mounted in a steel frame that
could be adjusted for a variable impact angle. For
the transparent targets optical access of the con
Sanded Polymers 45 deg.
 Flooring Materials failed
 Staticworx Ameriworx ESD Vinyl
 Staticworx Crystalline SD Vinyl
 Acetal Semitron 225 Delrin
 Polycarbonate Lexan
 Flooring Materials passed
 Staticworx Eclipse Rubber
 Ignition propagation in cracks
Fig. 4. Overview of skid testing results for a variety of low-melting-point materials showing the effect of grit
size and substrate hardness. All tests were done with 8-foot drops.
Acetal SemitronTM 225 DelrinTM
Polycarcarbonate LexanTM
Staticworx AmeriworxTM ESD Vinyl
Staticworx CrystallineTM SD Vinyl
Staticworx EclipseTM Rubber
Table 1. Table summarizing the explosive and polymers used in this test series
The Grit-Grit Mechanism
Several possible mechanisms exist
for gritmediated ignition on low-melting-point surfaces
including the energy released due to the fracturing of the substrate and viscous-shear heating of
the molten substrate. However multiple experiments were performed where a single grit particle
was struck on low-melting-point substrates and no
ignition was observed. Single grit experiments on
high-melting-point surfaces such as glass do result
in ignition see Fig. 5 which seems to imply that
the grit-substrate interaction on low-melting-point
surfaces does not lead directly to ignition.
grit-substrate interaction is responsible for ignition
on low-melting-point surfaces then the mechanism
appears to be either highly stochastic or is due to
a yet undetermined effect of a large number of grit
particles interacting with the substrate.
Currently the leading hypothesis for ignition on
low-melting-point surfaces is grit-grit collisions
which can release enough energy to lead to ignition
through several mechanisms. These mechanisms
could be the energy released by the fracturing of the
grit particles or due to the frictional energy between
the two interacting particles. Friction between the
two particles seems less likely to lead to ignition due
to the small size of the particles the particles will
rub together for a very short time which will limit
the amount of heat produced8. While it has not been
experimentally veried or modelled it is surmised
that shattering a particle will release enough heat to
ignite the PBX in the relevant time scale. It could be
possible that multiple collisions must occur within
a certain radius during the impact for ignition to occur. The exact mechanism for ignition due to gritgrit collision is not fully determined at this time and
will be the subject of further investigation.
The grit-grit hypothesis is supported by postmortem observation of the PBX and the substrate
when ignition was observed grit particles were
found embedded in both the PBX and the substrate.
Figure 6 shows microscopy of a drop on sanded
polycarbonate which resulted in ignition of the PBX
9501. The polycarbonate is only slightly harder
Shore D 81 than the PBX 9501 Shore D 69
which led to grit becoming embedded in both the
polycarbonate and the PBX. As well as grit becoming embedded in both materials gouge marks are
visible in both the polycarbonate and the PBX making it clear that a grit-grit collision was possible.
Fig. 5. Still frames from high-speed video showing the glass-PBX interface during an oblique impact into a
stationary glass target. The arrow indicates the direction of travel for the PBX. A single particle of grit was
placed at location a and was dragged to location b where a luminous ignition site is seen.
The boxed area in Fig. 6 shows a possible grit-grit
The Effect of Hardness
When the impacted substrate is softer than the
PBX the grit particles embed preferentially in the
substrate and do not embed in the PBX Fig. 7.
For all impacted substrates softer than the PBX no
ignition was observed since no grit embedded in
the PBX there was no possibility of a grit-grit collision occurring which further supports the idea that
grit-grit collisions are responsible for ignition. This
offers a possible means of mitigating the hazard of
ignition due to glancing impacts covering highmelting-point surfaces with low-melting-point materials that are softer than the PBX being handled.
Also impacts on soft surfaces will lower the peak
normal force experienced by the explosive. The
force transducer data collected indicates that the
normal force exerted on a drop on glass is almost
twice that as on the soft AdipreneTM. However one
could speculate that if the PBX charge is mishandled such that grit particles become embedded in
PBX before the drop then grit-grit collisions can
occur on dirty soft surfaces. The reduction of the
normal force will reduce the energy released due
to grit-grit collisions and possibly reduce the hazard in this scenario. However the contact area be
tween the PBX and substrate is much higher on soft
surfaces. This will increase the connement in the
event of ignition and could possibly increase the risk
of propagating to a violent reaction.
noted that this line of reasoning is entirely speculative.
Probability of Grit-Grit Collisions
The grit-grit collision mechanism is highly
stochastic and is dependent on variables such as the
angle of the grit-grit collision glancing impacts versus normal impacts the number of collisions and
the shape and strength of the individual grit particles among others. Due to the multi-scale nature
of the event which spans from the grain scale to
the macroscopic it is difcult to capture these variables with the current experimental setup. However
it is possible to calculate the probability of a grit-grit
collision if the grit density grit size drop height and
impact angle are known.
Equation 1 gives the probability that one or more
grit-grit collisions will occur where the areal particle density is  A is the area swept out by the impacting explosive   A p is the probability that
impacted grit becomes embedded L is the distance
the impacting explosive sweeps over the surface and
r is the radius of the grit. Both A and L depend on
Fig. 6. Micrographs of the surfaces of polycarbonate left and PBX 9501 right after impact. The polycarbonate was slightly harder Shore D 81 than the PBX 9501 Shore D 69 and was heavily sanded particle
size range of 150-250 m. Embedded grit particles a as well as gouged tracks b are evident in both
materials. The dashed box surrounds a grit-grit collision site. The arrows indicate the direction of travel for
the PBX. The scale bars have lengths of 500 m left and 1000 m right.
Using image analysis it was possible to measure
the areal grit density  of the prepared targets for
grit sizes down to 150m. In all the tests performed
 was found to be greater than 1.5  105 particles
m2 for the largest grit size used. For the smaller
grit sizes the areal grit density rose signicantly 
106. At these areal densities and drop heights the
probability of having one or more grit-grit collisions
approaches one see Fig. 8 . This shows that for all
tests where ignition was observed the probability of
having a grit-grit collision was approximately one
which lends credence to the hypothesis that grit-grit
collisions are responsible for ignition.
there were multiple tests where the
probability of a grit-grit collision was approximately one but no ignition was observed this is due
to the highly stochastic nature of the grit-grit collision. Many factors would inuence the amount
of energy released during a collision the orienta
tion of the grit particles the shape of the particles
the angle of the collision how direct the collision
was the strength of the particles are they cracked
or awed in the collision as well as how the particles embed in both the PBX and the substrate. For
example due to the granular nature of both the PBX
and many of the substrates tested a particle could be
embedded with different strengths on different locations which would lead to different forces during a
It has been shown in a series of skid tests that
glancing impacts of consolidated explosives such
as a PBX on heavily sanded low-melting-point
polymers can lead to ignition and propagate to violent reaction. Currently collisions between grit particles are the most likely mechanism for ignition. It
is thought that the shattering of the grit during collision can release enough energy in the relevant time
Fig. 7. Micrographs of the surfaces of AdipreneTM b and PBX 9501 a after impact. The AdipreneTM was
softer Shore D 42 than the PBX 9501 Shore D 69 and was heavily sanded particle size range of 500-1000
m. Embedded grit particles are found in the AdipreneTM but not in the PBX while track marks are found
in the PBX but not in the AdipreneTM. The arrows indicate the direction of travel of the PBX.
Fig. 8. A plot showing the probability of grit-grit
interaction depending on drop height and coverage
density . The xed parameters were particle size
r  250m probability of moving p  0.50 and
frame to ignite the PBX. This hypothesis is supported by three main pieces of evidence as well as
micrographs showing collision sites.
First single grit experiments were carried out on
both high and low-melting-point substrates where
ignition was observed only on the high-meltingpoint surfaces. On low-melting-point surfaces no
ignition was observed which seems to eliminate
any grit-surface interaction as the responsible mechanism for ignition. This is as expected since it has
been shown that for two frictionally interacting materials the maximum temperature reached is capped
by the lowest melting point of the two surfaces.
Second in experiments where ignition was observed grit particles were embedded in both the
PBX and the substrate which gives the possibility
of a collision occurring. In materials softer than the
PBX the grit particles embedded preferentially in
the substrate and not in the PBX. This means no
grit-grit collision could occur and in these cases no
ignition was observed.
Third it is also possible to calculate the probability of a grit-grit collision occurring given that
the areal grit density is known. For all tests where
ignition was observed the probability of a grit-grit
collision was very close to one and it is likely that
multiple collisions were occurring. As mentioned
above in cases where collisions were unlikely no
ignition was observed.
Armed with this knowledge it is possible to mitigate the dangers of oblique impacts. Since the current series of tests indicates that the grit-grit hazard is greatly reduced on substrates that are softer
than the PBX it would be possible to use soft lowmelting-point surface coverings e.g. rubber mats
to mitigate this hazard. Thisused in conjunction
with appropriate cleanliness standards set by Eq. 1
gives a clear means of controlling one of the main
hazards when handling energetic materials.
7. Frank-Kamenetskii D. A. Calculations of
Thermal Explosion Limits Acta Physicochem
USSR Vol. 10 p. 365 1939.
8. Bowden F. and Tabor D. The Friction and Lu
brication of Solids Oxford New York 2001.
9. Heatwole E. Parker G. R. Holmes M. Dickson P. and Gunderson J. Probability Calculation of Grit-Grit Interaction on a Plastic Bonded
Explosive During Glancing Impacts LANL Report LA-UR 13-25877 2013.Effects of Orientation PressureStrain Rate and Microstructure on the Quasi-static 
Deformation and Shock Response of Single Crystal Explosives 
Kyle J. Ramos1 Marc J. Cawkwell1 Cindy A. Bolme1 and Daniel E. Hooks1 
1 Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos NM 87545 
deformation  within  molecular 
cyclotrimethylene  trinitramine  RDX  single  crystals  were  subjected  to  quasistatic  and 
dynamic  loading.  Nanoindentation  plate  impact  and  molecular  dynamics  simulations 
were  conducted.  A  review  of  the  investigations  results  illustrates  that  hypotheses  of 
simple  slip  do  not  correlate  with  the  observed  responses  and  deformation  in  RDX  is 
dependent  upon  orientation  pressurestrain  rate  and  microstructure.  Recently  lineimaging  velocimetry  and  more  rigorously  controlled  crystal  growth  and  thorough 
characterization  have  been  pursued  to  identify  control  and  map  defects  from  solvent 
growth and to quantify their effects on deformation responses near the Hugoniot elastic 
Dislocation-mediated 
implicated  in  initiation  mechanisms  affecting  the 
detonation  sensitivity  of  explosives.  However 
deformation  in  molecular  crystals  is  not  well 
understood  leaving  many  details  of  proposed 
initiation mechanisms open for speculation. From 
a  general  understanding  of  plasticity 
conventional  materials  deformation  mechanisms 
are  known  to  be  dependent  upon  orientation 
pressure strain rate and the initial microstructure. 
In  order  to  elucidate  any  connections  between 
mechanical  stimuli  and  detonation 
crystal  plasticity  in  low  symmetry  molecular 
materials must be characterized and understood at 
a mechanistic level.  
     Over  a  number  of  years  we  have  assessed 
cyclotrimethylene  trinitramine  RDX  looking  for 
correlations with accessible slip systems in several 
orientations.  We  have  performed  quasi-static  and 
dynamic  deformation  investigations  of  oriented 
RDX  single  crystals  using  nanoindentation  plate 
simulations.  The  results  revealed  orientation 
pressure  andor  strain  rate  effects.  Stochastic 
features  near  the  HEL  in  wave  profiles  indicated 
possible microstructure effects therefore we have 
recently  pursued  line-imaging  velocimetry  and 
more  rigorously  controlled  sample  growth  and 
microstructure to the observed responses.   
     The purpose of this paper is to summarize the 
progression of our understanding of deformation in 
RDX  single  crystals  developed  over  the  last 
publications to provide a comprehensive review of 
our previous findings and present new ones using 
additional  plate  impact  experiments  line-imaging 
velocimetry  and  sample  characterization 
quantify and identify the origins of microstructure 
reference  previous  data 
effects.  We  illustrate  that  hypotheses  of  simple 
slip  to  account  for  deformation  in  molecular 
crystals  are  often  oversimplifications  and  the 
complicated effects of orientation pressure andor 
strain  rate  and  microstructure  dependencies  must 
understanding and predictive modeling. 
Plate  impacts  were  performed  on  various 
thicknesses  of  111  210  100  and  021orienteda  single  crystal  RDX  to  peak  uniaxial 
pressures  of  approximately  1  and  3  GPa  to 
dependencies.  Experimental  transmission  velocity 
profiles were measured in a common configuration 
illustrated in Fig. 1 using a single stage gas gun as 
described  in  Refs  1-4.  MD  simulations  of  these 
nonreactive  fully  flexible  molecular  potential  for 
intramolecular bonding in RDX. 56  
Fig.  1.  Target  configuration  for  plate  impact 
     Nanoindentation  and  atomic  force  microscopy 
AFM  were  performed  on  210  021  and 
a hkl represents the family of symmetrically 
equivalent planes whereas hkl refers to a 
specific plane. Note that RDX is orthorhombic and 
therefore hkl does not imply permutations of the 
single  crystals  of  RDX 
investigate  quasistatic  deformation  and  identify 
deformation  mechanisms  at  smaller  scales  and 
higher  resolution  than  previously  possible.  A 
Hysitron  TriboIndenter  Minneapolis  MN  USA 
with a low-load transducer was used with a conical 
diamond  indenter  tip  as  described  in  Refs  78. 
Indentation samples and surfaces were prepared by 
solvent growth dissolution thermal cleavage and 
homogeneous  nucleation  and  source  activation  of 
dislocations in samples with varying initial defect 
Microstructure  investigations  included  single 
crystal  sample  characterization  and  plate  impact 
line  resolved  velocimetry. 
Single  crystal  samples  were 
indexed  crosssectioned  mechanically  polished  solvent  etched 
and  photographed  with  optical  microscopy  to 
identify and map defects. White beam synchrotron 
X-ray projection topography was also performed at 
Brookhaven National Laboratory for more detailed 
characterization  of  a  reduced  set  of  samples. 
Single  crystals  were  impacted  in  the  same  plate 
configuration  mentioned  above  and  line-imaging 
transmission velocity profiles were measured over 
2  mm  using  a  Mach-Zehnder  interferometer  as 
described in Ref 9. 
Orientation Effects 
At  the  outset  of  the  RDX  investigations  we 
pursued an approach similar to that used by Dick 
in  a  seminal  series  of  studies  of 
cyclotetramethylene  tetranitramine  HMX.14  The 
three orientations shown in Table 1 were selected 
based on differences in ability to relieve stress via 
known  slip  systems.  Dick  et  al.  observed  a 
correlation between the accessibility of slip HEL 
stresses  and  initiation  thresholds  for  PETN10-13 
and  the  accessibility  of  slip  in  HMX  seemed  to 
correlate  with  orientation  dependent  HELs  as 
well.14  Orientations  with  access  to  slip  systems 
had  lower  HELs  a  similar  correlation  was  not 
observed  for  RDX.  The  elastic  precursors  in  the 
111-orientation  were  overdriven  whereas  the 
conventional elastic-plastic two-wave responses at 
nominally  the  same  stresses.24  Also  there  were 
stochastic  inflections  in  the  velocity  profiles  near 
the  HELs  which  were  especially  pronounced  for 
the 100-orientation and not understood. Because 
of  these  results  two  subsequent  investigations 
were undertaken i nanoindentation to confirm the 
published  slip  systems  in  literature  and  ii  lower 
pressure  plate  impact  experiments  to  resolve  the 
elastic precursor in all three orientations. 
     Ambiguous  slip  system  determinations  were 
one potential explanation for the lack of observed 
nanoindentation. The length and loading scales 
used in the nanoindentation studies allowed for 
separation  of  brittle 
failure  and  plastic 
deformation mechanisms typically convoluted 
larger stresses for molecular crystals.78 
Elasticplastic behavior was observed in loaddepth curves prior to cracking for the first time 
in  an  explosive  crystal.  Topographic  postcharacterization of indent regions using AFM 
as illustrated in Fig. 2 revealed deformation 
previously achieved in molecular crystals.  The 
results were consistent with the majority of 
previous  slip  system  determinations  but 
demonstrated slip occurs predominantly on 
011 rather than 021 planes and showed 
mechanisms such as cross slip that are still not 
Fig.  2.  12  m  AFM  deflection  image  of  the 
impression from a 6.7 mN indent on a 210 plane 
with projected zone axes overlaid.8  Slip traces and 
a  crack  are  parallel  to  zone  axes  consistent  with 
slip  on  011  021  at  B  and  010  slip  planes 
and  an  anisotropic  001  cleavage  plane.  The 
apparent presence of slip on both 011 planes at 
A on single slip traces and the deviation of 011 
slip  traces  from  a  straight  line  indicate  complex 
deformation  mechanisms  rather  than  just  simple 
slip of perfect dislocations.  
Table 1. Angles between RDX impact planes and known deformation directions.24 Angles for the 100 
shock plane have been omitted because they are perpindicular.  
   aAngle between the shock plane and the deformation direction 
Pressure andor Strain Rate Effects 
The plate impact experiments performed at 1 GPa 
revealed well-resolved  elastic-plastic  response for 
all three orientations. The precursor in the 111orientation was nominally the same as in the other 
directions  and  was  not  overdriven.15  Stochastic 
inflections  in  the  velocity  profiles  near  the  HELs 
remained. The abrupt change from an overdriven 
elastic-plastic  response  in  the  111-orientation 
with  the  slight  decrease  of  2  GPa  signaled  a 
potential  deformation  mechanism  or  rate-induced 
     The  plate  impact  experiments  on  the  111orientation  were  simulated  over  a  range  of 
pressures  with  MD.1  The  simulations  revealed 
homogenous nucleation of partial dislocation loops 
with  Burgers  vector  0.16010  on  001  at  shock 
pressures greater than 1.3 GPa. Calculations of the 
010  cross-section  of 
the  001  generalized 
stacking  fault  energy  surface  as  a  function  of 
applied pressure along 001 revealed the stacking 
fault  enclosed  by  the  partial  dislocation  loops  is 
rendered metastable by a stress-induced change in 
molecular  conformation.  From 
understanding of this mechanism we were able to 
Homogeneous  nucleation  of  partial  dislocation 
loops  on  001  were  predicted  to  occur  for  all 
orientations  of  the  shock  propagation  direction 
wherein  the  compressive  stress  acting  normal  to 
001  and  shear  stress  parallel  to  010  reached 
experiments on the 021-orientation substantiated 
Microstructure Effects 
Stochastic inflections in the velocity profiles were 
investigated  further  and  are  being  presented  here 
for  the  210-orientation.  Samples  with  bulk 
defects much more severe than anything typically 
used  in  previous  experiments  were  intentionally 
selected  for  plate  impact  results  to  gauge  the 
relative  effects  they  might  have  on  the  HEL.16 
Figure  3  presents  the  velocity  profiles  that  were 
observed.  Large  defects  including  surface  finish 
cracks  and  voids  were  shown  to  have  an  effect 
but are easily avoided during sample preparation. 
The  remaining  variation 
in  velocity  profiles 
observed for optically pristine samples even after 
duplicating  six  shots  for  the  210  and  100orientations15  led  us  to  suspect  the  crystals  were 
exhibiting spatially heterogeneous responses from 
more  subtle  microstructure  within  the  crystals 
potentially originating during solvent growth.  
illustrates  a  spatially 
Fig.  3.  Velocity  profiles  from  plate  impact  of 
210-oriented  RDX  crystals.  The  samples  for 
shots  1353  and  1355  intentionally  contained  a 
single  and  multiple  voids  respectively.16  The 
samples  in  the  remaining  shots  were  optically 
velocity  profile  from  a  210-oriented  RDX 
crystal.  The  profile  has  pronounced  spatial 
variation.  The  stress  relaxation  behind  the  elastic 
precursor varies along the 2 mm line length as well 
as  the  plastic  wave  which  exhibits  periodic 
oscillations every 200-240 m. Profiles averaging 
50 micron width sections were extracted from the 
data shown in Fig. 4a and are presented in Fig. 4b. 
All our previous observations of subtle stochastic 
inflections  using  point  VISAR  measurements  in 
multiple experiments are reproduced within this 2 
mm wide line-imaging velocimetry measurement.  
210 - 100 - 210  zone axis and swept around 
until  it  was  nearly  parallel  to  the  210   plane 
continuing until it finally intersected the common 
021 - 010 - 021   zone  axis.    The  orientation 
of the plane of voids agrees with the observations 
made  for  larger  crystals  that  are  difficult  to 
examine entirely because samples must be cut and 
polished for observation.  
Fig.  4.  aLine-imaging  velocimetry  data  from 
plate impact of a 210-oriented RDX crystal.  b 
Several  velocity  profiles  extracted  from  the  data 
microstructure origins for the spatial variations we 
performed  etching  and  optical  microscopy  on 
small crystals to infer defect microstructures from 
known  correlations  between  planes  of  voids  and 
preferential  dislocation  alignment  originating 
during solvent growth.  Figure 5 depicts one small 
single  crystal  that  was  examined.    There  was  a 
plane  of  voids  intersecting  the  100  010  and 
001  habit  planes  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  6.    By 
progressively  focusing  deeper  into  the  crystal  the 
the  plane  of  voids  could  be 
observed. The plane of voids is initially normal to 
210   intersecting  the  surface  at  the  common 
Fig.  5.  a  A  small  001  oriented  RDX  single 
crystal  that  has  been  etched  with  acetone.  The 
001 surface appeared to dissolve through a layerby-layer  process.  The  arrows  indicate  b  a  plane 
of  clustered  voidssolvent  inclusions  and  c  a 
ledge  having  undergone  dissolution  during 
     When  the  crystal  depicted  in  Fig.  5  was 
etched a large number of pits were formed on the 
210  and  021  planes  adjoining  the  plane  of 
voids in contrast etching produced what appeared 
to be layer-by-layer dissolution on the 001 plane 
as  shown  in  Fig.  5  c..    These  observations 
010 - 021   growth  sector  boundaries  were 
heavily strained leading to preferential inclusion of 
solvent in voids that served as origination sites for 
dislocations  emanating  out 
adjoining 210 and 021 planes.  It follows that 
100  samples  from  crystals  bounded  by  large 
210 - 100 - 210 and 
210 morphological habit planes tend to contain 
larger strains because of growth rate disparities at 
the  210-100  growth  sector  boundaries  during 
crystal  growth.  From 
these  observations  we 
suspect  the  100  samples  used  in  plate  impact 
experiments  contained  greater  strains  and  defect 
content  than  the  210  and  111  samples  even 
when voids were not observed.   
respectively  using 
Fig. 7. Illustration of a 010 and b 100 planes 
obtained  after  cross  sectioning  a  large  RDX 
crystal.  A  plane  of  clustered  voidssolvent 
inclusions  is  indicated  by  a  red  arrow  in  a  and 
further detailed at and just below the surface in c 
microscopy.  The  100  plane  in  b  contained  a 
similar  plane  of  voids  in  a  horizontal  orientation. 
Solvent  etching  revealed  a  large  increase  in 
dislocation density in the proximity of the voids.   
microstructure characterization for both PETN and 
RDX using X-ray transmission topography. Figure 
8 illustrates successful characterization of a PETN 
plate  impact  sample.  Surface  damage  during 
abrasive  cutting  on  a  wire  slurry  saw  was 
successfully removed with solvent polishing while 
maintaining acceptable dimensional tolerances for 
impact  experiments.  In  contrast  RDX 
samples  require  extensive  dissolution  to  remove 
surface  defects  that  would  otherwise  obscure 
characterization of defects from growth throughout 
the sample. In our previous attempts the extensive 
dissolution  rendered  the  samples  dimensionally 
useless for plate impact experiments. Currently we 
are using the PETN crystals in impact experiments 
with  line-imaging  velocimetry  to  quantify  the 
effects  of  defects  on  HELs  and 
thresholds  along  with  their  spatial  heterogeneity. 
We  envisage  similar  experiments  for  RDX  once 
the  challenges  associated  with  X-ray  topography 
Fig.  6.  Schematic  illustration  of  the  RDX  crystal 
depicted in Fig. 5 a. The blue plane illustrates the 
observed  for  RDX  single  crystals.  The  plane  is 
oriented  normal  to  the  100   and  010 habit 
planes  but  is  contorted  as  it  transitions  between 
them.  The  plane  is  coincident  with  the  210100  
boundaries.  The  dotted  lines  represent  where  the 
plane intersects habit planes and the dashed lines 
represent the hidden boundary of the plane.  
     Figure 7 depicts a slab cut and polished from a 
large  single  crystal  4x3x2  cm  which  would 
typically  be  used  for  preparing  plate  impact 
samples. The cross sectioning of the large crystal 
confirmed  the  presence  and  configuration  of 
planes of voids emanating dislocations as observed 
in  the  smaller  crystals.  Since  210-oriented 
samples are from adjoining planes they would be 
expected to exhibit similar microstructural features 
but to a lesser extent.  
conventional elastic-plastic response.  
Pressure andor Strain Rate Effects 
Abrupt changes in the elastic-plastic response with 
small  decreases  in  pressure  signaled  deformation 
mechanism  andor  rate  changes  in  plate  impact 
mechanistic  insight  and  predictions  that  were 
substantiated by further experiments.3  It is worth 
noting  that  the  activation  of  the  001010  slip 
system  by  shock  loading  could  not  have  been 
anticipated  based  on  either  crystallographic 
arguments  or  quasistatic  loading  experiments. 
extrapolating  materials  properties  over  many 
orders of magnitude in strain rate and ii the utility 
of  atomistic  modeling  to  understand  deformation 
Microstructure Effects 
boundaries  during  solution  growth.18    Growth 
sector  boundaries  are  regions  which  persist 
through the bulk of the crystal that correspond to 
the  path  traced  by  the  intersection  of  adjoining 
habit  planes  through  the  crystal  during  growth.  
Adjoining  planes  that  have  sufficiently  different 
growth  rates  cause  strained  regions  with  slightly 
different  lattice  parameters  dd    10-5  to  10-7 
usually  corresponding  to  mostly  tilt  boundaries 
with  very  small  lattice  distortion.19    There  have 
been a number of defect studies of as-grown single 
crystals of RDX and several etch pit studies have 
been  conducted.2021    Assemblage  of  voids  into 
well  defined  planes  which  appeared  to  emanate 
dislocations that intersected adjacent surfaces was 
noted by Gross.21  A number of x-ray topography 
studies  characterized  the  microstructure  of  asgrown single crystals of RDX.22-26 Crystals grown 
from  acetone  were  found  to  contain  dislocation 
densities  of  10  to  103  lines  per  cm2  and  growth 
sector  boundaries  with  a  typical  strain  of  10-5.23 
Bulk  defects  such  as  solvent  inclusions  were 
found to serve as origination sites for dislocations 
the  conventional  Lang 
Fig.  8.  X-ray  projection  topograph  of  110 oriented  PETN  sample  obtained  in  transmission 
topograph  was  obtained  from  111   diffraction 
and the geometry is schematically depicted in the 
stereographic  projection.  This  sample  is  intended 
for  a  plate  impact  experiment  wherein  lineimaging  velocimetry  will  be  fielded  along  the 
yellow  line  to  measure  the  effects  of  the  strain 
associated  with  the  underlying  growth  sector 
boundary on the HEL.      
Orientation Effects 
The  orientation  dependent  HELs  could  not  be 
correlated  with  known  quasistatic  deformation 
deformation  at  an  elementary  level  previously 
unattainable  in  molecular  materials.78  This  data 
has  subsequently  been  used 
constitutive material model.17 However we still do 
not  have  a  full  understanding  of  the  underlying 
fundamental  deformation  mechanisms  which 
leads  to  significant  contradictions.  For  example 
according to our current understanding RDX does 
not possess five independent slip systems required 
to  accommodate  general  strain  distributions. 
Therefore  continuum  material  modeling  would 
predict incompatible strains leading to cracking or 
unrealistic  strains  under  loading.  Nevertheless 
100-oriented  crystals  wherein 
resolved stress on known slip systems under planar 
importance  of  a  crystal 
indicated  earlier  by  Gross  and  similarly 
confirmed in other materials.2119  
     Typically  the  large  RDX  crystals  used  in  the 
preparation  of  our  samples  for  plate  impact 
experiments  are  bound  by  four  large  210  habit 
planes  enclosing  the  c-axis.    The  morphological 
habit  contains  210  111  and  001  or  small 
adjoining capping planes.  The reticular area of the 
210  planes  are  typically  about  four  times  the 
area  of  the  next  largest  111  planes.    The 
depends  on  its  growth  velocity.  Faces  disappear 
sooner the faster they move away from the growth 
center during crystal growth.27-29 Thus the growth 
velocity  of  100  planes  is  much  faster  than  their 
adjoining  210  planes  because  210  planes  are 
prominent planes in the morphologic habit of RDX 
whereas 100 planes are rarely present.  It follows 
that strains associated with the 210-100 growth 
sector  boundary  are  likely  contributing  to  the 
observed  inflections  in  particle  velocity  profiles 
near the HEL in 210 and 100-orientations.  
     Optical microscopy was conducted on sections 
of samples obtained from large crystals and whole 
small single crystals capable of having their entire 
bulk  examined  within  the  working  distance  of 
microscope  objectives  with  sufficient  resolution. 
Sections  of  large  crystals  examined  with  optical 
microscopy contained distinct planes of 1-10 m 
voids  that  agreed  with  similar  observations  made 
     Gross  noted  the  existence  of  these  features  in 
RDX and conducted etching studies. He observed 
dislocation  etch  pits  preferentially  appeared  on 
210  planes  that  were  paralleled  by  planes  of 
voids  and  concluded  the  dislocations  originated 
from the voids. This interpretation agrees with Xray  topography  investigations  of  RDX  and  other 
  Halfpenny  et  al. 
solution  grown  crystals. 
measured  typical  strains  of  10-5  associated  with 
growth  boundary  sectors  but  did  not  observe 
similar  planes  of  voids.23  This 
Halfpenny  et  al.  likely  maintained  a  lower  more 
constant  growth  rate  compared  to  Gross19  and 
therefore  even  greater  strains 
necessary  for  solvent  inclusion  and  can  exist  at 
growth  sector  boundaries  in  RDX.  Klapper  et  al. 
examined  a  number  of  different  types  of  crystals 
grown  from  solution  using  X-ray  diffraction 
topography and elucidated growth sector boundary 
effects  on  microstructure.1819  They  demonstrated 
strained regions within crystals incorporate solvent 
in voids preferentially voids with liquid inclusion 
are effective origination sites for dislocations and 
dislocations typically radiate to the surface so that 
they  intersect  perpendicularly.  This  configuration 
between the dislocations and surface decreases the 
contribution  of  image  forces  to  dislocation  line 
energies.30    Although  Halfpenny  et  al.  did  not 
observe  planes  of  voids  Grosss  interpretation 
agrees  with  the  broader  observations  of  defect 
microstructures in solution grown crystals.    
     Past growth and characterization studies along 
with those presented here demonstrate anisotropic 
distributions  of  defect  microstructures  in  RDX 
single  crystals.  Defects  are  preferentially  aligned 
with  growth  sector  boundaries  especially  along 
the  210-100  zone  axis.  Our  plate  impact 
experiments indicate these microstructure features 
even  in  optically  pristine  single  crystals  wherein 
we  expect  strains  on  the  order  of  10-5  and 
dislocation  densities  of  10  to  103  lines  per  cm2 
have  significant  effects  on  HELs  in  velocity 
profiles.  Therefore  we  have  begun  efforts  to 
identify how defects are originating in the crystals 
i.e.  strain  at  growth  sector  boundaries  control 
characterize any remaining microstructure prior to 
experiments and use spatially resolved diagnostics 
to  measure  the  associated  heterogeneity  during 
plate impact experiments.     
An  improved  understanding  of  the  fundamental 
properties  of  dislocations  in  RDX  might  address 
some  of  the  apparent  contradictions  seen  in  the 
elastic-plastic responses of oriented single crystals. 
metallurgists3132  to  compute  the  structure  of  the 
core of dislocations are likely to become powerful 
tools  in  this  respect.  Atomistic  simulations  of 
single  straight  dislocations  can  reveal  with  little 
ambiguity  on  which  planes  a  dislocation  with  a 
given Burgers vector is most likely to glide as well 
as  the  propensity  of  screw  dislocations  for  cross 
slip. Fundamental information of this nature on the 
properties  of  perfect  dislocations  in  molecular 
crystals  would  be  a 
theoretical  methods 
interpretation  of  experiments  under  either  quasistatic deformation or shock compression. 
capabilities  for  X-ray  diffraction  and  imaging 
using  the  Dynamic  Compression  Sector  at  the 
Advanced  Photon  Source  and  the  Materials  in 
Extreme  Conditions 
Coherent  Light  Source  will  enable  even  further 
insights into the complex deformation of RDX and 
other  energetic  crystals  in  the  near  future.  These 
capabilities  can  provide  necessary  in  situ  data 
during  impact  and  are  currently  being  used.33-36 
The  ability  to  monitor  both  average  lattice  and 
spatially heterogeneous responses will allow more 
detailed  resolution  of  deformation  mechanisms 
and  quantitative  assessment  of  correlations 
between crystal mechanics defects and detonation 
Deformation  of  molecular  crystals  is  complex. 
Seminal  studies  have  demonstrated  correlations 
between  accessibility  of  slip  and  HELs  in  which 
orientations with access to slip systems identified 
at ambient conditions yield at lower stresses under 
loading.  The  quasistatic  and  dynamic 
experiments  and  commensurate  MD  simulations 
presented  in  this  paper  demonstrate  that  this 
correlation does not hold for RDX. Hypotheses of 
molecular  crystals  as  a  general  rule  are  often 
oversimplifications and the complicated effects of 
orientation  pressure  andor  strain 
microstructure dependencies must be characterized 
to  develop  quantitative  understanding 
predictive modeling. 
This work was supported by the National Nuclear 
Security  Administration  Science  Campaign  2  and 
LDRD program and was performed at Los Alamos 
National Laboratory under DE-AC52-06NA25396.  
The  authors  gratefully  acknowledge 
support  provided  by  Timothy  Pierce  and  Tate Ultrafast Dynamic Response of Single Crystal PETN and Beta-HMX 
Joseph M. Zaug Michael R. Armstrong Jonathan C. Crowhurst Louis Ferranti Raymond Swan 
Richard Gross Nick E. Teslich Jr. Mark A. Wall Ryan A. Austin and Laurence E Fried 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94551 
Abstract.  We  report  100  ps  time-scale  compression  wave  speeds  from  shocked  single 
crystal PETN and beta-HMX. The ultrafast compression rise-time and the high temporal 
resolution of our time-domain interferometry measurements enable characterization of the 
anisotropic  sub-nanosecond  dynamic  response  of  energetic  materials.  Wave  speed  is 
measured during the first few microns of lateral propagation into a crystal and prior to the 
onset  of shock  induced  initiation.  Single  crystal  wave  speeds  reveal  a  clear  anisotropic 
dynamic response. For propagation in the direction normal to the 110 crystallographic 
plane we measure predominately elastic component wave speeds. Below 12 GPa wave 
propagation speeds in the direction normal to the 010 plane in beta-HMX overlap with 
established shock Hugoniot and static measurements. The 010 ultrafast data also match 
well with scaled PBX9501 data that extend up to 15 GPa. For shock pressures that exceed 
12  GPa  along  the  HMX  crystallographic  b-axis  wave  speeds  increase  along  an 
established line while gas gun and diamond-anvil cell derived values increase sublinearly. 
At 26 GPa the slope dUSdUP decreases for ultrafast shock data the commensurate drop 
in volume may be attributed to a previously reported phase transition. These results will 
help guide the development and validation of crystal mechanics models. 
A  general  premise  of  energetic  materials 
EMs  continuum  scale  modeling  efforts  is  that 
understanding  the  nature  of  shocked  solid-phase 
formulations  on  1    1000  ps  timescales  and  submicron  to  micron  length  scales  will  enable  more 
predictions of steady-state detonation physics and 
chemistry.  The  work  presented  here  begins  to 
explore the dynamic response of solid-phase EMs 
on  the  100  ps  timescale.  Another  motivation 
driving  this  work  is  to  extend  the  range  of 
measured EM unreacted shock Hugoniot states. If 
one  can  shock  solid  explosives  on  an  ultrafast 
timescale  and  measure  wave  propagation  speeds 
with  a  sufficiently  high  temporal  fidelity  then 
principal Hugoniot states can be probed at higher 
particle  velocities  Up  than  otherwise  possible 
using  longer  time  scale  experimental  platforms. 
When  conducting  ultrafast  timescale  studies  care 
must be taken to measure wave speeds and also to 
type  of  wave  being 
properly  attribute 
measurements  are  complementary  to  gas  gun 
shock  studies  and  ideally  both  platforms  are 
to  more  comprehensively 
characterize  how  microstructure  e.g. 
defects and voids affects the dynamic response of 
shocked  materials  over  a  seven-fold  or  more 
decadal range in strain rate and compression time. 
Here we report on the dynamic response of PETN 
compression  along  different  crystallographic 
directions.  Single  crystals  were  chosen  for  this 
study because of their relatively low defect density 
and  void  fraction.  Moreover  one  can  begin  to 
phenomena on  10 mg EM samples that are wellsuited for study using tabletop laser shock systems. 
The  reported  experimental  results  provide  new 
therefore  guidance 
theoretical  efforts  aimed  at  modeling 
elasticplastic  response  of  shocked  solid-phase 
EMs  and  EM  formulations.  For  example  grainlevel  modeling  efforts  are  starting  to  address  the 
shock  wave  loading  of  porous  beta-HMX  crystal 
on a nanosecond time scale1.  These calculations 
which  incorporate  the  anisotropic  stress-strain 
behavior  of  beta-phase  HMX  could  be  improved 
by  making  comparisons 
Experimental Details 
that  achieve  picosecond 
nitrogen  gas  a  50  nm  thick  layer  of  polystyrene 
was spin coated onto the free crystal surface. Next 
a transmission electron microscopy TEM grid or 
mask  was  secured  to  the  polished  side  of  the 
crystal  and  approximately  1  m  of  aluminum 
containing  5 wt. oxygen was sputtered onto 
the  surface  using  a  Gatan  Precision  Etching 
Coating  System.  After  the  aluminum  deposition 
sequence  was  completed  the  TEM  mask  was 
removed.  A  grid  of  125  x  125  m  Al  ablators 
remains  see  Fig.  1.  PETN  and  HMX  sample 
assemblies  were  stored  in  a  desiccator  20 
Fig. 1. A completed beta-HMX sample assembly. 
Each  Al  ablator  is  125  x  125    x  1  m.  Thirty 
ultrafast shock measurements have been made on 
this particular sample. 
Ultrafast Shocks and Measurements 
The ultrafast shock experimental technique used in 
this study has been described in great detail2. We 
use a chirped pulse amplification system CPA to 
generate a single laser pump pulse  400 J pulse 
energy  350  ps  pulse-width  25  nm  bandwidth 
12  ps  width  rise  time  to  launch  a  shock  wave 
within a 1  m thick aluminum ablator. A shock 
wave  propagates  through  the  ablator  and  breaks 
out into an energetic material. A small fraction of 
the CPA pulse energy is diverted and split into a 
probe pair that are separated in time and focused in 
a collinear fashion onto a propagating shock wave 
see Fig. 2. The probe pulses partially backreflect 
off  of  the  propagating  shock  wave  and  also  from 
the surface of the propagating ablator or piston. In  
We began by cleaving 100 mg single crystals 
to  yield  approximately  20  mg  daughter  crystals. 
PETN  samples  were  cleaved  along  the  110 
crystal plane and beta-HMX crystals were cleaved 
along  110  and  010  crystal  faces.  All  crystal 
planes  cited  for  -HMX  are  given  in  the  P21n 
space  group.  Daughter  crystals  were  polished 
down  to    10  mg.  They  were  hand  polished  to  a 
lateral thickness of  1 mm using 3 m roughness 
Al2O3 paper. This intermediate polishing sequence 
was completed using 1 m roughness Al2O3 coated 
paper. No fluid carrier was used.. At this point 
single crystals were mounted into an annulus using 
UV  cured  epoxy.  The  free  surface  of  mounted 
crystals  was  lapped  mechanically  using  a  nylon 
cloth and a series of diamond lapping suspensions 
ranging  from  9  to  1  m  particle  size.  The  final 
lapping  sequence  was  conducted  on  a  short-nap 
cloth using a colloidal silica suspension. Once the 
final  lapping  sequence  was  completed  and  the 
crystal  surface  was  dried  using  house-supplied 
In Figure 3 we present an ultrafast time scale trace 
from  shocked  010  beta-HMX.  To  process 
ultrafast time domain interferometry data from an 
optically  transparent  material  we  first  select  a 
temporal window where the sinusoidal oscillation 
frequency and intensity offset are relatively stable. 
Within the truncated region we fit the data using a 
sine function linear background to determine the 
oscillation  period    red  curve  the  oscillation 
amplitude max and the phase intensity offset  
interferometry trace from beta-HMX shocked in a 
direction  normal  to  the  010  plane.  The  laser 
pump  pulse  energy  was  375  J.  The  shock 
pressure determined from the fit red solid curve 
green dashed line is 17.0 GPa. 
parameters  assuming  a  reasonably  constant  1D 
wave  front  profile  one  can  determine  the  shock 
US and piston UP velocity including the index of 
refraction ns behind a shock front. 
For  the  highest  magnitude  shock  velocities 
measured  in  this  experiment  wave  propagation 
into the EM is  2.5 m. The radius of curvature 
near  the  end  of  the  pump  pulse  duration  is 
nominally  50  m.  Therefore 
propagation  distance  is  approximately  5  of  the 
radius of curvature of the shock front. In this study 
we  integrated  phase  displacement  data  along  the 
center  pixel  where  maximum  shock  breakout 
occurs  see  Fig.  4.  We  further  demonstrate  that 
integrating  for  example  nine  CCD  rows  with 
maximum phase displacement from shocked  
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of the TDI pump-probe 
geometry.  To  enhance  clarity  the  diagram  is  not 
our  experiments  the  velocity  of  the  shock  front 
exceeds  the  piston velocity  of  the Al  surface  and 
so an etalon forms with a path length width that 
increases  with  time.  The  rate  of  change  between 
the optical phase of each backreflected probe pulse 
in  a  sinusoidal  beating  pattern.  The 
frequency  of  the  sinusoid  is  proportional  to  the 
shock  velocity.  The  selected 
between  each  probe  pulse  10  ps  determines  the 
intrinsic  temporal  fidelity  maximum  number  of 
fringes that may be recorded during the transit or 
duration of the optical pulse of our interferometric 
data.  The  passage  of  time  is  encoded  within  the 
linearly  dispersed  wavelength 
components  are  transformed  discretely  into  time 
using  an  imaging  spectrograph.  A  CCD  detector 
records  the  time  dependent  phase  and  intensity 
data. CCD pixel columns record time and the CCD 
pixel  rows  record  spatial  information.  One  row 
pixel   2 um and one column pixel   0.26 ps. A 
series  of  non-pump  images  are  recorded  and 
averaged to provide zero-phase no displacement 
calibration data. The intensity of the offset in the 
phase  modulated  signal  is  proportional  to  the 
piston velocity. Raw CCD images were read by a 
MatLab  script  written  to  generate  and  further 
process  time  dependent  phase  data.  To  filter-out 
high frequency noise a moving average window is 
applied to the time trace data. The time resolution 
of  our  data  ultimately  depends  on  the  temporal 
width  of  the  moving  window  in  this  study  the 
time resolution is 10.3 ps. 
time  dependent  optical  phase 
displacement  profile  from  which  shock  wave 
parameters were computed in Fig. 4.. The relative 
change in phase is measured in 10 ps increments. 
The  time  trace  in  Fig.  4  was  computed  by 
integrating phase data along pixel row 50. 
PETN  can  yield  essentially  the  same  results  as 
compared  to  fourteen  separate  shots  where  we 
integrate along the CCD pixel row with maximum 
displacement.  This  approach  was  previously 
demonstrated on polycrystalline PETN3. 
The  error  estimates  given  for  single-shot  US 
vs.  UP  data  are  the  residual  differences  between 
each  point  and  a  line  fit  to  all  points.  For  010 
HMX  two  lines  were  fit  one  for  data  below  26 
GPa and one for data above 26 GPa. Binned data 
point  errors  are  generated  in  the  same  way.  The 
minimum  number  of  points  per  bin  was 
determined iteratively over a pointsbin range of 28.  The  pointsbin  result  with  the  lowest  absolute 
sum total standard deviation value is selected. 
Experimental Results 
We  conducted  ultrafast  shock  experiments 
normal  to  the  110  plane  along  the  001 
direction  of  a  PETN  single  crystal.  Fourteen 
measurements  were  conducted  see  Fig.  5.  Time 
dependent  phase  displacement  profiles  were 
integrated along the CCD row with the maximum 
cumulative  displacement.  One  shock  profile  was 
integrated along nine different CCD rows and the 
results  agree  well  with  the  individual  shock 
measurements. Measured 001 wave velocities are 
significantly  larger  than  shock  wave  velocities 
from  longer  time  scale  Los  Alamos  Science 
Fig. 5. A comparison of TDI single crystal PETN 
and  gas  gun  shock  data45 
theoretical results6. 
Laboratory  LASL  gun  platform  measurements4 
including  single  crystal  110  results  by  Dick  et 
al.5 hence it appears that on the 100 ps timescale 
is  a  primarily  elastic  wave  response. 
Reported  PETN  gas  gun  data4  extend  to  a 
maximum  UP  of  1.4  kms.  In  the  region  of  our 
highest  obtainable  piston  velocities  beginning  at 
UP    2.0  kms  TDI  wave  speeds  match 
theoretically  predicted  shock  wave  values  well6. 
Using  experimentally  determined  second-order 
elastic  constants  for  PETN7  the  bulk  quasilongitudinal relaxed sound velocity was computed 
for propagation along the 001 direction. The TDI 
uncompressed quasi-longitudinal velocity at UP  
0  kms.  Atomic  scale  properties  e.g.  elastic 
constants may change in a nonlinear fashion when 
subjected to high strain fields hence here it may 
not  be  reasonable  to  expect  a  linear  trend  in 
pressure or UP dependent elastic wave speeds. 
Ultrafast  shock  TDI  measurements  were  also 
orientations of beta-HMX. In Figure 6 we overlay 
our binned 110 plane and 010 plane TDI results 
results4  hydrostatic 
with  available  gas  gun 
Bridgeman  cell8  and  quasi-hydrostatic  diamondanvil  cell9 
DAC  X-ray  diffraction  coldcompression  equation  of  state  results.  Hugoniot 
relations are used to transform each V P datum 
to a pseudo-particle and a pseudo-shock velocity. 
At shock pressures up to and near the bulk  
determined  second-order  elastic  constants14  and 
taking the average of the Voight and Reuss elastic 
compliance  models15.  Knowledge  of  KO  and  the 
difference in density between PBX-9501 and betaHMX  yields  a  4  difference  in  bulk  sound 
velocity.  Therefore  we  compared  TDI  wave 
to  4  scaled  PBX-9501  shock 
velocities see Fig 7.. Again we observe a perhaps 
fortuitous agreement between TDI and scaled gas 
gun  results  up  to  approximately  16  GPa.  It  is 
interesting  that  the  TDI  and  PBX-9501  shock 
velocities  increase  linearly  while  the  currently 
accepted  beta-HMX  equation  of  state  EOS 
increases sublinearly The EOS was derived using a 
3rd-order  Birch-Murnaghan  model  fit  to  all  10 
shock Hugoniot points4 and nonhydrostatic9 coldcompression P-V data. The scaled P-V PBX-9501 
data  are  plotted  in  Fig.  8  along  with  010  TDI 
Fig. 7.  A  comparison of  TDI  single  crystal  010 
beta-HMX shock data with density-scaled gas gun 
data  from  shocked  PBX-9501410111213.  The  bulk 
quasi-longitudinal  sound-speed  of  beta-HMX  is 
TDI  wave  velocities  from  ultrafast  shocked 
single crystal 110 PETN are markedly faster than 
our  previous  TDI  results  for  ultrafast  shocked 
polycrystalline PETN2. Our polycrystalline PETN 
TDI results nominally agree with published gas 
Fig. 6.  A  comparison of  TDI  single  crystal  110 
and 010 beta-HMX shock data with gas gun data 
from  shocked  single  crystal  and  polycrystalline 
including  cold-compression  P-V 
modulus  of  a  solid  volume  is  affected  primarily 
by  compressional  effects  and  not  thermal  effects 
isothermal  P-V  data  generally  match  well  with 
shock results. Much like the PETN results wave 
velocities normal to the 110 plane are attributed 
to elastic wave compression. Velocities normal to 
the 010 plane along the 101 direction may be 
from elastic andor plastic waves. In this direction 
there  is  good  agreement  with  previous  gas  gun 
shock wave measurements up to approximately 12 
GPa. For pressures in excess of 12 GPa ultrafast 
010  plane  101  direction  wave  velocities 
increase  linearly  along  a  line  that  fortuitously 
agrees  with  a  linear  fit  of  hydrostatic  coldcompression x-ray diffraction P-V measurements8. 
At  approximately  26  GPa  UP    1.8  kms  the 
slope of the TDI US vs. UP Hugoniot 010 wave 
speeds  decreases  and  above  26  GPa  TDI 
measurements  appear 
previous gas gun single crystal results4. There are 
only ten published shock wave measurements from 
beta-HMX and so to make additional comparisons 
we  scaled  published  PBX-9501  95  beta-HMX 
2.5 estane 2.5 nitroplasticizer shock data all 
from  LASL  or  LANL410111213  to  a  density 
adjusted  aggregate  bulk  quasi-longitudinal  sound 
speed.  The  bulk  modulus  of  beta-HMX  KO   
13.42 GPa was computed by using experimentally 
the  second  linear  trend.  If  we  extend  these  MD 
observations  10  ps  timescale  to  the  results 
observed  here  it  suggests  our  110  PETN  and 
beta-HMX elastic wave speeds are all faster than a 
critical  UP  value  where  wave  speeds  begin  to 
decrease linearly with a much steeper slope to the 
bulk  sound  speed.  MD  results  reveal  that  elastic 
and  plastic  wave  velocities  increase  until  the 
plastic wave overtakes the elastic wave resulting in 
a single plastic wave.  
It is possible that our 110 TDI velocities are 
a mixture of elastic and plastic wave components. 
For example at piston velocities less than 1.8 kms 
the  elastic  wave  amplitude  is  significantly  higher 
the  plastic  wave  and  at  faster  piston 
velocities the plastic wave component is dominate. 
PETN  110  TDI  shock  velocities  intersect  with 
extrapolated at UP  1.7 kms and also with recent 
DFT results up to 2.15 kms see Fig. 6. With the 
absence of gas gun data above UP  1.47 kms one 
cannot  definitively  determine  the  type  of  waves 
elastic andor plastic we measure in 110 PETN. 
At  piston  velocities  1.47  kms  polycrystalline 
PETN  TDI  data  including  DFT  results  indicate 
that  the  shock  Hugoniot  is  below  the  linearly 
extrapolated gas gun line.  
The  lowest  recorded  compression  110  PETN 
time traces reveal what appear to be plateaus in the 
intensity  phase  offset  UPt  that  may  be  simply 
interpreted  as  an  elastic  to  plastic  transition  in 
PETN  thus  signaling  the  Hugoniot  elastic  limit 
HEL  which  is  a  parameter  that  quantifies  the 
strength of a material see black line in Fig. 9. We 
rationalize  that  relatively  steady  unstructured 
shock  waves  break  out  of  the  ablator.  Similar 
pump  pulse  energies  used 
in  steady  plastic  waves 
breaking out from the free surface of the ablator17. 
At  higher  PETN  compression  drives  optical 
fluence the time traces have a steady offset at time 
 150 ps see red line in Fig. 9. If indeed higher 
TDI compression drive data are representative of a 
plastic wave then for shock stresses  16 GPa we 
are  measuring  unreacted  shock  Hugoniot  states 
that  are  at  most  25  percent  higher  in  shock 
pressure  than  previous  gas  gun  results  see  Fig. 
Fig. 8.  A  comparison of  TDI  single  crystal  010 
beta-HMX shock data with density-scaled gas gun 
data  from  shocked  PBX-950139-12.  The  26  GPa 
isobar  line  dashed  demarks  a  known  room 
temperature phase transition. 
gun  data.  Therefore  we  believe  there  must  be  a 
strong  elastic  component  to  our  single  crystal 
results.  We  also  note  that  unlike  gas  gun  results 
TDI  110  wave  velocities  do  not 
extrapolate  back  to  the  ambient  condition  bulk 
quasi-longitudinal velocity. This is not necessarily 
an unexpected observation because ultrafast shock 
strain  rates  1010  are  two  or  more  orders  of 
magnitude higher than gas gun strain rates.  
compressible KO  20 GPa and ultra-high strain 
fields  may  result  in  nonlinear  pressure  dependent 
elastic  velocities.  Indeed  molecular  dynamic 
MD shock compression studies1 of alpha-HMX16 
exhibit  nonlinear  UP  dependent  elastic  wave 
speeds an elastic wave inflection point in the USUP plane links two linear trends and it occurs when 
a  plastic  wave  component  nucleates  within  the 
crystal. The initial linearly increasing elastic wave 
velocities exhibit a significantly higher slope than 
1 The MD simulations for -HMX are described as 
having  an  infinite  strain  rate  in  the  shock  front. 
the  boundary  conditions  may  be 
discontinuous  the  shock  front  should  spread  out 
with  propagation  distance  leading  to  finite  strain 
rates away from the boundary piston. 
12 GPa. The corresponding 110 and 010 piston 
velocities  appear  to  be  invariant  with  the  loading 
direction  see  Fig.  11.  Low  strain  rate  uniaxial 
loading  experiments  normal  to  the  110  plane 
reveal  that  it  is  less  ductile  then  010  crystal 
twins  form  and  an  elastic  to  plastic  transition 
occurs.  The  mechanical  response  to  compression 
loading normal to the 010 plane exhibits no twin 
formation  or  twin-slip  deformation  mechanisms18 
and  thus  in  the  101  direction  HMX  is  more 
ductile. An elastic to plastic response will require 
more  strain  assuming  equal  stiffness  compared 
to  compression  normal  to  the  110  plane.  It  has 
twinslip  deformation 
dynamics  observed  at  low  strain  rates  also  affect 
deformation  phenomena  occurring  at  gas  gun 
strain  rates19.  The  010  HEL  may  occur  at  a 
higher  piston  velocity  and  with  a  higher  stress 
amplitude than the 110 HEL. 
Fig.  11.  Time  domain  interferometry  traces  from 
single  crystal  beta-HMX.  To  enhance  clarity  the 
110 trace is shifted upward by 0.15 radians10ps. 
Each trace is an average of three single-shot traces. 
The  processed  results  from  each  trace  are  plotted 
in  Figure  7.  they  are  the  lowest  piston  velocity 
points same color coordination. The 110 shock 
values  are  UP    0.76    0.09  kms  US    5.76   
0.12 kms. The 010 shock values are UP  0.70  
0.05 kms US  4.39  0.19 kms. 
The time traces plotted in Figure 11 appear to 
be  steady  for  time    150  ps  there  is  no 
discontinuous  jump  in  piston  velocity  like  that 
Fig.  9.  Time  domain  interferometry  traces  from 
PETN shocked in a direction normal to the 110 
plane.  The  vertical  dashed  lines  black  and  red 
indicate the region where the data corresponding 
solid black and solid red curves were processed to 
determine  shock  and  particle  velocities.  For  both 
shots black line   10053 and red line  10054 
the  pump  pulse  energy  was  nominally  377  J 
however  the  pump  areas  were  different  thus 
resulting in markedly different offset intensities or 
Fig. 10. A comparison of TDI single crystal 110 
PETN shock data with previous gas gun data from 
shocked  polycrystalline  and  single  crystal  110 
PETN including more recent theoretical results. 
In contrast to 110 velocities ultrafast 010 betaHMX results match well with gas gun data below 
interferograms  in  Figure  11  are  representative  of 
elastic waves then we might expect to first see an 
HEL in 110 beta-HMX. If our interpretations are 
correct then this is precisely the opposite of what 
we  observe  see  Fig.  12.  Referring  back  to  the 
TDI  data  plotted  in  Figures  6  and  7  we  must 
reiterate  that  all  of  the  reported  results  were 
derived  from  processing  the  steadiest  component 
of time trace wave profiles. No attempt was made 
to process time dependent displacement in regions 
with a significant increase jump in displacement 
regions  would  have 
statistically significant increases in piston velocity. 
It  becomes  abundantly  clear  that  a  2x  or  longer 
drive  duration  with  a  bit  more  available  drive 
compression would greatly improve our ability to 
characterize  wave  profiles  with  predominately 
more plastic deformation.  
Fig. 12. Single crystal beta-HMX time traces that 
exhibit the first signatures of what may be loosely 
interpreted as an elastic to plastic wave transition. 
To  enhance  clarity  the  010  line  was  shifted  by 
0.35 radians10 ps. The E-P transition occurs first 
lowest  piston  velocity with  compression normal 
to the 010 plane. The 010 trace consists of an 
average of three shots and the 110 trace consists 
of  an  average  of  six  shots.  The  010  shock 
velocity  is  5.99    0.12  kms  and  the  110  shock 
velocity is 6.91  0.23 kms.  
The divergence observed between TDI elastic 
wave results and the accepted beta-HMX EOS will 
be reduced when we in fact measure plastic wave 
velocities  but  will 
there  be  near  complete 
agreement?  A  comparison  between  ultrafast  TDI 
The  experiments  presented  in  this  paper 
represent  our  first  attempts 
dynamic  response  of  ultrafast  shocked  single 
crystal  EMs.  It  would  appear  that  ultrafast  rise 
time  and  350  ps  pulse  duration  shocks  are 
sufficient  to  characterize  the  elastic  response  of 
ultrafast shocked single crystal EMs however in 
order to more confidently extend measurements of 
unreacted  shock  Hugoniot  states  propagating  in 
an arbitrary direction we will need to lengthen our 
compression  studies  of  solid-phase  EMs.  Our 
compression drive duration will be lengthened to 1 
ns  and  more  laser  energy  will  be  utilized  to 
achieve higher shock stress states or to increase the 
compression  volume  thus  permitting  studies  of 
composite  materials  with  grain  sizes  up  to  10 
continue  ultrafast 
010  beta-HMX  measurements  most  probably 
elastic  waves  with  the  density  scaled  PBX-9501 
EOS reveals a fortuitously good agreement up to a 
shock stress of 16 GPa. At 16 GPa the PBX-9501 
EOS  is  significantly  stiffer  than  the  currently 
accepted  beta-HMX  EOS.  Our  TDI  data  and  the 
PBX-9501  EOS  may  indicate  that  the  currently 
accepted  beta-HMX  EOS  will  need 
corrected  it  is  based  partly  on  just  10  shock 
Hugoniot  points  where  the  three  highest  pressure 
point  values  may  be  affected  by  a  phase 
transition920.  The  robustness  of  the  beta-HMX 
EOS is debatable21.  
We  acknowledge  financial  support  from  the 
DOELLNL High Explosives Science Campaign-II 
program  office.  This  work  was  performed  under 
the  auspices  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy 
by  Lawrence  Livermore  National 
Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344. Modeling Small Scale Detonation Experiments with Pressed TATB 
David E. Kittell1 Peter J. Renslow12 Lori J. Groven13 and Steven F. Son1 
1Purdue University West Lafayette IN 47907 
2 Sandia National Laboratories Albuquerque NM 87185 
3South Dakota School of Mines and Technology Rapid City SD 57701 
Abstract.  A  unique  small-scale  characterization  experiment  has  been  proposed  to 
measure  the  instantaneous  shock  or  detonation  velocity  in  small  diameter  explosive 
charges using microwave interferometry MI. The experimental configuration allows for 
the  investigation  of  steady  state  failure  and  shock-to-detonation  phenomena.  In  this 
work the well-studied explosive triaminotrinitrobenzene TATB is used to evaluate five 
pre-existing  models  based  on  Arrhenius  history  variable  and  ignition  and  growth 
reactive  burn  models  at  densities  of  40-96  of  TMD.  Pressed  TATB  samples  are  in 
contact  with  an  explosive  booster  or  separated  by  a  polymethylmethacrylate  PMMA 
attenuator  to  determine  a  critical  thickness  for  initiation  failure.  One-  and  twodimensional  simulations  using  the  hydrocode  CTH  show  that  Arrhenius  and  history 
variable models matched experimental reaction wave velocity data well above 60 TMD 
however the reaction zone thickness was anomalously thin 10-100 m and the critical 
attenuator  thickness  was  under-predicted  by  a  few  millimeters.  In  contrast  the  ignition 
and growth model did not match the measured velocities but showed a realistic reaction 
zone thickness 0.5-2 mm instabilities in shock pressure detonation failure below 60 
TMD  and  longer  critical  attenuator  thickness  estimates.  Future  work  will  consider  the 
small-scale experiment as an improved tool for the validation and possibly calibration of 
other explosives models. 
 Calibrating  reactive  burn  models  or  an 
equation  of  state  for  a  high  explosive  is  an 
expensive  and  challenging  task.  The  methods 
 Sandia  National  Laboratories  is  a  multi-program  laboratory 
managed and operated by Sandia Corporation a wholly owned 
subsidiary  of  Lockheed  Martin  Corporation  for  the  U.S. 
of  Energys  National  Nuclear  Security 
Administration under contract DE-AC04-94AL85000. 
either involve a high degree of complexity e.g. in 
situ-material  particle  velocity  gauges1  or  require 
large  100  g  sample  sizes  for  use  in  rate  stick 
cylinder wedge and corner turning tests2. Not only 
are  these  experiments  typically  prohibitive  for 
broad  parametric  studies  in  sample  composition 
density or initial temperature they may not yield 
models that are accurate extrapolating beyond the 
conditions of the experiments. Recently emphasis 
has  been  placed  on  expanding  the  capabilities  of 
small  scale  characterization  tests  to  help  validate 
explosives  models.  Examples  of  these  kinds  of 
the  sub-critical  diameter 
tests  include  the  tiny  plate3  Floret  detonation 
spreading2  and  Mushroom  tests45.  However  the 
major  drawback  of  these  experiments  is  limited 
data collection during the detonation event  i.e. a 
simulation is used to model the final outcome but 
not the associated detonation process. 
Microwave  interferometry  MI  is  an 
established  technique  used  to  measure  shock  and 
detonation velocities in certain explosives that act 
as  a  transmission  medium  for  the  microwave 
radiation67.  Originally  proposed  for  increased 
spatial  resolution  over  the  previous  measurement 
techniques  it  offers  several  benefits  including 
dynamic  measurement  and  additional  information 
contained  in  the  amplitude  of  the  interference 
signal8. In previous work9 small quantities 2 g 
of  ammonium  nitrate  and  fuel  oil  ANFO  were 
initiated  by  an  explosive  booster  and  failed 
Microwave  interferometry  was  used  to  measure 
the  velocity  decay  of  the  leading  shock  wave. 
However  lacking  a  well-characterized  explosive 
model  for  ANFO  there  was  no  precedent  for 
interpretation of that data as it pertained to model 
Triaminotrinitrobenzene  TATB  is  an 
insensitive  high  explosive  used  in  plastic  bonded 
explosives  such  as  PBX  9502  and  LX-17.  It  has 
been  well-studied  under  a  wide  variety  of 
conditions  multiple  calibrated  burn  models  are 
available as well as other test data including Popplots from wedge tests1011. Moreover the material 
properties  of  TATB  are  amenable  for  the  MI 
technique and permit experimental studies. 
The objective of this work is to compare 
data  obtained  for  pressed  TATB  from  our  smallscale  MI  experiment  with  simulations  from  the 
shock  physics  hydrocode  CTH12.  Fundamental 
modeling  challenges  are 
microstructure and complex reactive flow behavior 
of  porous  TATB    and  these  challenges  are 
acknowledged.  Nevertheless  our  goal 
determine  whether  or  not  pre-existing  models 
configurations can be used to simulate the smallscale experiments. 
Experimental Approach 
A  35  GHz  signal  was  generated  using  a 
transmitted to the test article through a solid 0.635 
cm diameter Teflon waveguide refer to Fig. 1 for 
a  schematic  of  the  experiment.  A  quadrature 
mixer was used to produce two-channel output 90 
degrees out of phase and was recorded at 2.5 GHz 
using  a  Tektronix  DPO4034  Digital  Phosphor 
Oscilloscope.  Timing  of  the  experiment  is  based 
on first light observed by fiber optics a M34L02 
Thorlab patch cable with a 600 m core diameter 
photodetector with a 1 ns rise time. Data analysis 
is performed using a wavelet-based technique14. 
The explosive charge consists of the test 
explosive  pressed  TATB  BAE  Systems  lot 
BAE12K296-009 and a booster of Primasheet 
1000  Ensign  Bickford.  The  explosive  charge  is 
initiated  by  a  Teledyne  Risi 
exploding bridge-wire  EBW  detonator  and  1m 
of  detonating  cord  Nobel  Primaline  4HS  the 
1m  stand-off  distance  between  detonator  and 
charge  provides  a  time  delay  for  electrical  noise 
from  firing  the  EBW  to  dissipate.  The  test 
explosive  is  pressed  into  0.651  cm  I.D.  304 
stainless  steel  tubes  with  a  Carver  25  ton  press. 
TATB  density  was  varied  from  40  to  96 
theoretical  maximum  density  TMD  using  an 
incremental  procedure  with  aspect  ratio  LD  no 
greater than 1.0 for each increment. In addition a 
polymethyl  methacrylate  PMMA  attenuator  of 
varying length was placed between the booster and 
test explosive for shock initiation studies. 
One-  and  two-  dimensional  geometries 
in  CTH.  Numerical  studies  with 
various  burn  models  indicate  that  a  high  mesh 
density is needed for grid-independent solutions11 
therefore a fixed mesh of 160 zonesmm was used 
in all cases. This grid resolution is high compared 
to other work1516 so a small domain 1.8 cm long is 
used  to  minimize  computation  time.  The  domain 
length is insufficient for other transient problems 
however  the  detonation  wave  in  6.35  mm  dia. 
TATB  is  well-supported  the  failure  diameter  is 
symmetry  were  used 
approximately  4  mm10  and  with  additional  steel 
confinement  the  transition  to  detonation  is  rapid. 
computational geometries. 
for  a  schematic  of 
Fig. 1. Schematic drawing of the small-scale microwave interferometer experiment. 
Fig. 2. Simulation geometries for a baseline 2D model b attenuator study and c baseline 1D model. 
The explosive booster is modeled with a 
programmed  burn  at  the  Chapman-Jouguet  CJ 
the  manufacturer  specified 
density  composition  and  detonation  velocity  for 
Primasheet  1000  Jones-Wilkins-Lee 
equation of state EOS parameters were estimated 
from  CHEETAH17  calculations  and  are  shown  in 
Table  1.  The  programmed  burn  is  assumed  to 
reasonably predict the input pressure into the test 
explosive and attenuator. The test explosive is then 
modeled  with  one  of  five  pre-existing  models 
these models include three different types  history 
variable  reactive  burn  HVRB 
growth  reactive  burn  IGRB  and  Arrhenius 
reactive  burn  ARB    corresponding  to  four 
different  material  preparations  ultrafine  U- 
coarse porous CP coarse high density HD and 
superfine  SF  pressed  TATB  powder  refer  to 
Table 2.  These  models  are available  in  the  CTH 
library  and  are  calibrated  from  a  wide  array  of 
experiments51118. Additional material models used 
include a Mie-Grneisen EOS for PMMA and 304 
Table  1.    JWL  parameters  for  the  explosive 
cid2025cid2868 gcm3 
cid1830cid3004cid3011 kms 
cid1842cid3004cid3011 GPa 
limit  of  100  MPa.  Currently 
To attempt a match over a wide range of 
initial  porosities  the  P-  porosity  model19  was 
used  to  modify  the  pre-existing  TATB  models. 
Further  approximations  included  no  elastic  work 
zero maximum elastic pressure and a compaction 
implementation of the P-  porosity model in CTH 
is only possible when the unreacted EOS is a MieGrneisen  or  tabular  form.  Hence  the  IGRB 
model  for  U-TATB  utilizing  a  JWL  EOS  option 
required  modification.  A  temporary  solution  was 
to transplant the reaction rate constants from IGRB 
to  a  new  Mie-Grneisen  EOS  for  the  same 
material.  These  reaction  rate  constants  should  be 
re-calibrated  but  are  used 
demonstrate  characteristic  features  of  the  IGRB 
option as compared to the other models. 
A final modification was necessary in the 
CP  HD  and  SF  HVRB  models  to  allow  for  the 
density  variations.  It  is  known  that  the  reaction 
rate constant PR is a function of the initial density11 
 without modification the HVRB models predict 
detonation  failure  below  90  TMD.  Using  the 
correction formula cid1842cid3019cid4593cid1842cid3019cid4678cid2025cid4593cid2025cid4679cid2872 
it was found that the one-dimensional calculations 
match  the  CJ  detonation  velocity  down  to  40 
TMD this modification was adopted in the present 
work.  The  fourth  power  relationship  of  Eq.  1 
matches some empirical trends in Pop plot data11 
but is not a general rule. 
A  wavelet-based  analysis14  was  used  to 
TATB  for  porosity  levels  ranging  between  40  to 
96  TMD.  In  these  experiments  the  booster 
transitioned  directly  to  the  test  explosive  without 
passing  through  an  attenuator.  Examples  of  the 
velocity profiles are shown in Fig. 3 velocity data 
has been offset so that the transition occurs at time 
zero.  Some  unsteady  velocities  are  observed    in 
general this can be due to the numerical technique 
transient detonation or variations in density. From 
unsteadiness  is  due  to  pressed  density  gradients 
in  a  companion  paper14 
the  detonation  velocity 
  Summary  of  pre-calibrated  TATB 
U-TATB  Mie-Grneisen 
Notes  Arrhenius  burn  ARB  history  variable 
reactive  burn  HVRB 
ignition  and  growth 
reactive  burn  IGRB  micronized  ultrafine  U- 
coarse porous CP coarse high density HD and 
similar to what was observed in early MI studies6. 
the  experimental  data  with 
simulations only an average velocity is used. 
Fig. 3. Shock velocity profiles in pressed TATB. 
One-  and  two-  dimensional  geometries 
were  simulated  with  each  of  the  five  TATB 
models see Table 2 for all porosity levels tested. 
Except  for  the  IGRB  model  all  one-  and  two- 
dimensional results were nearly identical and show 
a  rapid  transition  from  the  booster  velocity  to  a 
steady  detonation  velocity  in  the  test  explosive. 
This transition takes no more than 2 mm examples 
of  the  velocity  profiles  obtained  for  the  ARB 
model are shown below in Fig. 4. The only models 
to predict detonation failure were the IGRB model 
below  60  TMD  and  the  HVRB  HD  model 
above 90 TMD. Failure at high density with this 
model is due to the implementation of Eq. 1. 
Fig. 4. Simulation results for pressed TATB with 
ARB model transition located at 0.2 cm. 
Average  experimental  and  simulated 
velocities are shown together in Fig. 5 along with 
CJ  calculations  and  sound  speed  estimates  from 
CHEETAH and an empirical relation from LASL 
for  the  infinite  diameter  detonation  velocity  for 
TATB10.  Model  results  correspond  to  the  twodimensional  simulations  only.  No  significant 
difference  was  observed  between  one-  and  two- 
dimensional  velocities  except  for 
model. For the model cases of coarse porous CP 
coarse  high-density  HD  and  superfine  SF 
TATB all three HVRB models predicted the same 
velocity    except  that  the  HD  model  with  P- 
modification failed above 90 TMD. 
The  experimental  data  matches  the  CJ 
detonation speed until 60 TMD. At this point 
the measured shock speed is close to the material 
sound  speed  and  the  detonation has  weakened if 
not  failed  altogether.  It  is  possible  that  the 
detonation  waves  at  low  porosity  levels  are  nonideal  in  this  case  wave  front  curvature  and  subsonic reaction zone regions can lower the velocity 
below the CJ speed20. 
Fig.  5.  Experimental  simulation  and  empirical 
relations for the shock velocity in pressed TATB. 
From the simulation results it is clear that 
the  IGRB  model  does  not  predict  the  correct 
velocity.  This is  likely  due  to  switching  the  JWL 
EOS  for  Mie-Grneisen  so  that  the  P-  porosity 
model  could  be  used    ideally  the  rate  constants 
should be recalibrated. In simulations with IGRB 
the  reaction  progress  reached  approximately  80 
completion  this  reaffirms  the  need  to  recalibrate 
the  rate  constants.  However  the  IGRB  model 
predicts  detonation  failure  below  60  TMD  and 
the  other  models  do  not.  Before  the  failure  the 
IGRB  model  shows  an  unsteady  reaction  zone 
which  can  be  observed  in  the  shock  pressures 
Zeldovich  Von Neumann  Dring ZND spike 
pressure shown in Fig. 6. 
Fig.  6.  Shock  pressure  ZND  peak  pressure  as  a 
function of position for IGRB U-TATB. 
Estimates  of  the  reaction  zone  thickness 
for  each  TATB  model  are  listed  in  Table  3.  The 
estimates  are  based  on  the  average  distance 
between the 1 and 98 reaction contours  for 
IGRB  the  upper  limit  was  98  of  the  maximum 
observed  progress.  The  ARB  and  HVRB  models 
have reaction zone thickness on the order of tens 
of microns. To achieve the suggested minimum of 
eight  cells  per  reaction  zone21  a  mesh  density 
higher than 160 zonesmm is required in some of 
these  cases.  Under  such  conditions  the  reaction 
progress  is  virtually  instantaneous    there  is  no 
time  to  establish  instabilities  that  can  lead  to 
detonation  failure  at  low  TMD.  However  the 
IGRB model has a reaction zone thickness on the 
order of a few mm. It is known that TATB-based 
explosives such as LX-17 and PBX 9502 exhibit 2 
to 3 mm reaction zone lengths15. Hence the IGRB 
model  may  be  closer  to  a  physical  description  of 
porous TATB once the reaction rate constants are 
Table  3.    Average  reaction  zone  thickness  for 
different TATB models over 40-96 TMD. 
Calculated  as  the  distance  between  the  1  and 
98 reaction contours. 
The PMMA attenuators of varying length 
were placed between the booster and test explosive 
to  determine  a  critical  thickness  for  detonation 
initiation failure. The TATB samples were pressed 
at  two  porosity  levels  96  and  80  TMD.  In 
addition two-dimensional simulations were run at 
both  porosity  levels  for  all  five  TATB  models  to 
determine  a  critical  attenuator  thickness    this 
thickness  is  defined  as  the  threshold  between 
propagation  and  failure.  The  experimental  and 
simulation  results  are  compared  in  Table  4.  No 
results  are  available  for  96  TMD  with  the  HD 
model  because  this  model  fails  above  90  TMD 
as previously discussed numerical incompatibility 
between  the  P-  modification  and  Eq.  1  at  high 
Table 4.  Experimental and simulation results for 
the critical attenuator thickness. 
the  attenuator  results  existing 
TATB models either under-predict or over-predict 
the critical thickness. The ARB and HVRB models 
with a small reaction zone thickness under-predict 
the critical thickness. Initiation with these models 
resembles  the  shock  initiation  of  a  homogeneous 
explosive having a super-detonation wave22. Even 
before  a  steady  detonation  is  reached  there  is  a 
sharp  gradient  in  the  reaction  profile  behind  the 
leading  shock  and  the  reaction  zone  is  small  a 
few  m.  These  simulations  resemble  a  go  or 
no-go condition. In contrast the IGRB model has 
a thicker reaction zone. As the attenuator thickness 
increases  the  reaction  tends  to  slowly  build  over 
several  mm  behind  the  leading  shock.  When  the 
reaction persists as it often does it can build into 
a steady detonation wave hence estimates of the 
larger.  This  behavior 
resembles the reactive wave build-up observed in 
heterogeneous  explosives21.  Since  none  of  the 
models  exactly  capture  the  experimental  results 
future  work  should  tune  the  model  parameters  or 
explore new types of reactive burn models such as 
A  second  major  conclusion  from  the 
attenuator  results  is  that  differences  in  shock 
sensitivity due to density can be measured with the 
small-scale  experiment.  The  difference  in  critical 
attenuator  length  between  96  and  80  TMD 
may  be  explained  with  hot  spot  theory24.  Porous 
materials  are  more  shock  sensitive  because  they 
have  more  void  space  to  collapse  and  a  greater 
number of sites to form hot spots. The lower input 
pressure  from  a  longer  attenuator  produces  more 
hot spots in the 80 TMD material than for 96 
When  the  attenuator  length  is  less  than 
the critical length it is possible to infer a time and 
transition.  It  is  known  that  the  MI  technique 
provides additional information in the amplitude of 
the  interference  signal8.  The  amplitude  is  greater 
for  reflections  from  a  detonation  wave  ionizing 
plasma and less for reflections from a shock wave 
density gradient  both types of reflections occur 
at discontinuities in the material dielectric constant 
or  at  density  gradients6.  An  example  of  the  MI 
interference  signal  is  shown  in  Fig.  7  for  80 
TMD  with  attenuator  thickness  of  5  mm.  In  this 
example the TATB is initiated after a short 1 s 
In total four experiments were performed 
below  the  critical  length  that  also  showed  a 
measureable  SDT  delay  2x  at  96  TMD  and  1 
mm and 2x at 80 TMD and 5 mm. In order to 
compare  this  data  with  existing  Pop-plot  data  for 
pressed  TATB10  the  input  pressure  had  to  be 
determined.  The  small-scale  experiment  is  not 
shock-to-detonation 
the  shock  pressure  within 
instrumented to measure shock pressure  so CTH 
simulations  were  used  to  estimate  these  values. 
The  code  used  to  extract  shock  pressure  as  a 
function of position refer to Fig. 6 was also used 
attenuator these results are presented in Fig. 8. For 
these  simulations  the  reaction  was  turned  off  in 
the  pressed  TATB  the  input  pressure  is  taken  as 
the  peak  pressure  just  beyond  the  attenuator  into 
the test explosive. 
Fig. 7. MI interference signal for 80 TMD with 
attenuator thickness of 5 mm. 
Fig. 8. CTH calculations of the shock pressure in 
the attenuator and pressed TATB. 
input  pressure  versus  run 
distance is shown in Fig. 9 along with wedge test 
data  from  Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory 
LASL10.  At  96  TMD  the  experimental  data 
falls  on-line  with  Pop-plot  data  at  a  similar 
density.  For  80  TMD  no  existing  data  was 
found however the experimental data falls on-line 
with Pop-plot data for 88 TMD. More tests are 
needed  to  verify  that  the  data  obtained  from  the 
small-scale  experiment  is  compatible  with  wedge 
test data. It is possible the small sample diameters 
and  type  of  confinement  could  influence  the 
curves obtained. Regardless the initial agreement 
with prior test data is promising  future work will 
be done to determine if the small-scale experiment 
is a viable alternative to wedge tests. 
Fig. 9. Pop-plot for TATB with new data from the 
small-scale characterization experiment. 
A small-scale characterization experiment 
is proposed to measure the instantaneous shock or 
detonation  velocity  in  small  diameter  explosive 
charges  using  microwave  interferometry  MI. 
This  experiment  allows  for  validation  of  new 
explosive  models  while  also  making  parametric 
studies  feasible.  To  determine  that  pre-existing 
models calibrated at the large scale may in fact be 
used  to  simulate  the  small-scale  experiments  the 
well-characterized  explosive  TATB  was  selected 
for  study.  In  this  work  five  pre-existing  TATB 
models  were  used  to  simulate  a  variety  of 
experiments  at  different  initial  densities  with  the 
shock  physics  hydrocode  CTH.  These  models 
included  an  Arrhenius  history  variable  and 
ignition  and  growth  reactive  burn  spanning  four 
different  material 
types.  These  models  were 
calibrated to a single initial density and needed to 
be  modified  with  a  P-  porosity  model  to  match 
All  pre-calibrated  TATB  models  except 
ignition and growth predict an accurate detonation 
velocity above 60 TMD. In this range the actual 
velocity  is  close  to  the  CJ  limit.  Although  the 
ignition  and  growth  model  under-predicted 
velocity it was the only model to show detonation 
failure  and  non-ideal  behavior  below  60  TMD. 
The  error  in  velocity  with  ignition  and  growth  is 
likely a result of modifications used to run the P- 
porosity  model  and  could  be  improved  by  recalibrating  the  rate  constants.  Another  conclusion 
from  these  simulations  is  that  the  Arrhenius  and 
history variable  reactive  burn  models  predict  thin 
reaction zones on the order of tens of microns. Not 
only  do  the  thin  reaction  zones  require  higher 
mesh densities for grid independent solutions they 
fail to predict other trends such as the drop off in 
velocity  below  60  TMD  and  are  not  physically 
correct. In contrast the reaction zone thickness for 
the ignition and growth model is on the order of a 
few  millimeters  and  can  develop  dynamic 
instabilities  such  as fluctuations  in  the detonation 
spike  pressure.  This  thickness  is  similar  to  the 
known  reaction  zone  length  of  2  to  3  mm  in 
TATB-based  explosives  such  as  LX-17  and  PBX 
The  small-scale  experiment  was  also 
configured  to  measure  the  shock  sensitivity  and 
critical attenuator length for pressed TATB. A go 
or  no-go  condition  was  used  to  calculate  the 
critical attenuator length experimentally and with 
simulations using different explosive models. The 
critical length was under-predicted by a few mm 
for  the  Arrhenius  and  history  variable  reactive 
burn models which have artificially thin reaction 
zones. The critical length was over-predicted by a 
few mm for the ignition and growth model which 
has  a  much  larger  reaction  zone.  Visually  the 
shock initiation for Arrhenius and history variable 
that  of  a  homogeneous 
explosive  whereas  shock 
ignition and growth model resembled the reactive 
wave  build-up  associated  with  a  heterogeneous 
Finally Pop-plot data was extracted from 
four  of  the  attenuator  experiments  conducted 
below  the  critical  attenuator  length.  Additional 
information  is  contained  in  the  amplitude  of  the 
MI  interference  signal  related  to  the  strength  of 
the  moving  reflector  i.e.  shock  or  detonation 
wave.  With  this  information  the  time  delay  and 
run  distance  associated  with 
the  shock-todetonation transition were estimated and combined 
with  the  input  pressures  predicted  by  CTH. 
Agreement is observed between new Pop-plot data 
and previous data from wedge tests and this will 
be verified with additional tests. If the agreement 
characterization  test  should  be  considered  as  a 
simpler alternative for the wedge test. 
is  based  upon  work 
supported  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Homeland 
Security  Science  and  Technology  Directorate 
Office of University Programs under Grant Award 
2013-ST-061-ED0001. The views and conclusions 
contained in this document are those of the authors 
and  should  not  be  interpreted  as  necessarily 
representing the official policies either expressed 
or  implied  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Homeland 
Security.  Additional  support  was  provided  by 
Sandia  National  Laboratories  through  the  Critical 
Skills Masters Program CSMP fellowship. The Role of Energy Deposited Post Bridgewire Burst on the Performance of 
Exploding Bridgewire Detonators. 
Elizabeth A. Lee Scott G. Aitken Mike D. W. Bowden Rod C. Drake and John Richardson 
Explosive Materials and Initiation Science Group 
Atomic Weapons Establishment Aldermaston Berkshire United Kingdom 
          Abstract.  To  identify  the  mechanism  by  which  pentaerythritol  tetranitrate 
PETN  is  initiated in Exploding Bridgewire EBW detonators a series of studies were 
performed in which  the  energy  was  tracked  from  fireset  to  detonator  output.  One  of 
the  outstanding  questions  arising  out  of  these  studies  was  how  much  if  any  of  the 
energy delivered post bridgewire burst contributes to the performance of the detonator.
          A  capacitor  discharge  fireset  was  developed  which  was  capable  of  limiting  the 
energy  deposited  in  the  system  post-burst  by  diverting  a  pre-selected  portion  of  the 
energy  away  from  the  detonator.  This  enabled  the  amount  of  energy  delivered  to  the 
detonator  to  be  controlled.  The  energy  delivered  to  the  bridgewire  as  determined  by 
voltage  and  current  probes  was  varied  and  the  effect  on  the  expansion  speed  of 
unconfined bridgewires and detonator functioning time was determined. 
Exploding bridgewire EBW detonators were 
designed in the 1940s by Luis Alvarez1 for use in 
the  Manhattan  Project.  These  detonators  have  a 
relatively  simple  construction 
bridgewire  typically  in  the  region  of  30m  in 
diameter  and  between  0.5  and  1mm  in  length  is 
held  by  an  insulating  material  diallylphthalate 
DAP  is  a  common  header  material  with  leads 
that  connect  the  detonator  to  the  fireset.  The 
bridgewire is embedded in a low density explosive 
fill  usually  PETN.  There  is  an  additional  high 
density  output  fill  which  may  also  be  PETN  or 
alternatively  explosives 
Despite  being  widely  used  for  the  past  70 
years  there  is  no  universally  accepted  initiation 
mechanism.  The  way  in  which  the  exploding 
plasma  interacts  with  the  explosive  to  produce  a 
detonation wave has been the subject of extensive 
world-wide  study  but 
mechanism. It is generally believed to be either a 
deflagration-to-detonation  DDT  or  a  shock-todetonation  SDT  transition.  Alternative  theories 
have  also  been  put  forward.  For  example  Frank 
suggests  that  the  electric  field  surrounding  the 
bridgewire at the time of burst ionizes the surface 
of the explosive such that the weak shock from the 
burst is sufficient to initiate the explosive2 whilst 
Cooper and Kurowski3 in their book Introduction 
to  the  Technology  of  Explosives  state  that  an 
EBW detonator is detonated via a shock transition 
caused by the bursting of the bridgewire. 
Recent  work  undertaken  at  AWE45  has 
determined  that  shock  initiation  is  the  most 
credible  mechanism  by  which 
bridgewire  initiates  the  surrounding  low  density 
explosive fill. However there remain a number of 
understanding  of  the  functioning  of  an  EBW 
detonator.  The  role  of  energy  deposited  post 
bridgewire  burst  on  the  performance  of  EBW 
detonators has been studied in order to fill one of 
thus  explodes.  Ionisation  and Strain Response of Insensitive High Explosives to the Combined Effects of 
Confinement and Temperature Change 
Franco J. Gagliardi Bruce J. Cunningham Philip C. Souers and Steven T. Pease 
Physical and Life Sciences Department Chemical Sciences Division Energetic Materials Program 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94550 
Abstract. In the 14th International Detonation Symposium we presented results from a 
study  looking  at  the  effects  of  tri-axial  confinement  on  compressive  creep  rates  in 
Insensitive High Explosives IHEs. In this paper we report results from several related 
experimental  efforts  designed  to  further  enhance  our  understanding  and  predictive 
capability  regarding  the  response  of  confined  IHE  mechanical  behavior  to  temperature 
change. A comprehensive study of this topic is well beyond the scope of this forum so 
this  report  will  be  limited  to  certain  focused  efforts.  Included  are  discussions  of  1 
experimental work regarding hydrostatic pressure suppression of ratchet growth 2 strain 
response of confined IHE to temperature change and 3 the application of ratchet growth 
suppression  to  study  other  material  characteristics  such  as  binder  crystallinity.  In  this 
paper  background  information  of  previous  work  will  be  highlighted  and  current  work 
including hydrostatic pressure suppression of ratchet growth and the strain response of 
IHEs  as  a  function  of  temperature  and  confinement  will  be  presented  discussed  and 
related to modeling efforts. 
explosives IHEs to stress and temperature change 
is  complex.  This  is  because  IHEs  such  as  LX-17 
and  PBX  9502  are  highly  loaded  composites  that 
are  formulated  from  variably  sized  crystalline 
explosive  particles  and  a  plastic  binder.  The 
blending  and  compaction  of  these  constituents 
yield a product material that is from a mechanical 
response  perspective  both 
temperature dependent and whose response is also 
dependent  on  its  stress  and  thermal  histories.1  To 
further complicate matters powder IHEs that have 
been  compacted  into  solids  may  also  exhibit  a 
growth.2  This  phenomenon  is  essentially  an 
asymptotic  incremental  permanent  increase  in 
part  dimensions  that  is  the  consequence  of  the 
materials  exposure  to  temperature  cycling.  The 
consequences  of  ratchet  growth  can  be  density 
loss geometric distortion and mechanical strength 
reduction.345  All  three  of  these  phenomena  must 
be  understood  for  us  to  have  a  strong  basis  from 
which to build predictive lifetime material models 
for our explosive systems.  
Insensitive  high  explosives  are  made  with 
triaminotrinitrobenzene 
TATB  a  crystalline 
explosive  material  with  a  graphite-like  physical 
structure.6  From  an  energetic  material  safety 
standpoint TATB is highly insensitive to impact 
friction  electrostatic  discharge  heat 
chemically  stable  and  compatible  with  a  wide 
range  of  materials.7  These  features  are  highly 
desirable  from  the  perspective  of  creating  and 
maintaining stable and secure munitions.  
To maximize the amount of energy density of 
an explosive powder and to create a mechanically 
sound  part  TATB  powder  or  TATB  plastic 
bonded  explosives  PBXs  are  compacted  into 
dense solids usually between 92 and 98 of their 
theoretical  maximum  density.  Various  shapes  can 
be  made  with  either  punch  and  die  pressing  to 
shape or isostatic pressing of a large billet that can 
then  be  machined  into  a  finished  geometry. 
Typically  binderless  TATB  powder  is  pressed 
directly into shape with a punch and die assembly 
and  PBX  molding  powder  is  heated  and  then 
formed into rough shapes in an isostatic press. The 
rough  pressed  charge  resulting  from  the  isostatic 
press  is  then  precision  machined  into  its  final 
shape  or  shapes.  Whether  die  pressed  or 
isostatically  pressed  and  then  machined  the  final 
IHE  component  is  likely  to  experience  a  lifetime 
of thermal and stress variations. 
Many studies have shown that TATB crystals 
respond  in  a  highly  anisotropic  way  to  thermal 
change. For TATB the ratio of thermal expansion 
of  1631  has  been  measured  along  the  three 
crystal  axes.5  Millions  of  crystals  on  the  micron 
and  tens  of  micron  scale  go  into  making  the 
macro-scale TATB parts. The crystals within these 
formulation  and  pressing  process.  As  the  pressed 
material  is  heated  and  cooled  the  anisotropic 
crystals expand and contract in a way that disturbs 
the  original  geometry.  Voids  are  created  in  areas 
that  prior  to  thermal  cycling  had  been  well 
packed.8  Since  mass  is  conserved  through  the 
thermal  cycle  and  the  volume  has  increased  with 
the  formation  of  new  voids  the  density  of  the 
cycled part drops. Internal stress and strain in the 
material as a result of this expansion will depend 
compacted explosive charge.   
the  boundary  conditions  surrounding 
Pressing  technique  has  been  shown  to  affect 
the  level  of  directionality  in  macroscopic  thermal 
expansion  of  TATB-based  materials.910  Three 
main  types  of  pressing  operations  are  used  in  the 
processing  of  TATB  and  TATB-based  materials 
punch  and  die  pressing  isostatic  pressing  of 
hemispherical  shells  and  isostatic  pressing  of 
cylindrical billets. Punch and die pressing usually 
results in a part that is axisymmetric along the axis 
of pressing. During the die pressing process there 
seems to be a preferential alignment of the crystals 
in  a  way  that  leads  to  more  thermal  expansion 
along  the  axis  of  pressing  when  compared  to  the 
direction  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  pressing. 
isostatically  pressed  there  is  more  growth  in  the 
through-wall  direction  than  there  is  in  directions 
perpendicular to it.11 On the other hand cylindrical 
isostatic billet pressing is the most non-directional 
type  of  pressing  that  we  employ  and  the  parts 
show  isotropic  or  nearly  isotropic  expansionary 
behavior. Regardless of the pressing technique and 
anisotropically all three pressing techniques result 
in parts that exhibit ratchet growth. 
the  modeler.  From 
expansion  directionality 
complicating  factor  for  both  the  experimentalist 
standpoint  any  measurement  technique  that  is 
uniaxial  in  nature  such  as  a  Thermomechanical 
analyzer  will  need  to  be  performed  in  all  nonuniform  directions  so  that  volume  expansion  can 
be understood. At a minimum tests will need to be 
run twice as often to make sure that the anisotropic 
behavior  is  measured  and  quantified.  For  the 
material  model  is  based  on  will  need  to  be 
the  more  complex  3dimensional behavior.  
the  mathematical  equations 
In an effort to understand the nature of ratchet 
growth  of  TATB-based  materials  many  studies 
have  been  done  including  efforts  to  suppress  or 
eliminate  the  phenomenon.  Uniaxially  loading 
compacted  cylindrical  samples 
longitudinal axis or in the radial axis have shown 
that the growth of the material will find the path of 
least resistance. If a load is applied to the vertical 
axis of the cylinder more growth will occur along 
the unconfined radial direction. Similarly if a rigid 
cylindrical barrier is placed around the sample and 
the  vertical  axis  is  unconfined  more  growth  will 
happen  in  the  axial  direction.  Interestingly  since 
the expansion will find the path of least resistance 
the  total  volumetric  growth  is  comparable  for  the 
unconfined axially confined and radially confined 
Past studies by Cunningham et al have shown 
that  hydrostatic  confinement  or 
confinement of a sample equally on all sides can 
reduce  the  total  density  loss  associated  with  the 
thermal  ratcheting  of  the  part.12  In  their  study 
equipment limitations dictated the maximum level 
of confinement applied to their specimens and they 
found  that  the  upper  limit  available  to  them  was 
phenomenon. The research efforts recorded in this 
paper  build  upon  Cunningham  and  others  earlier 
attempts to suppress ratchet growth. In addition to 
demonstrating a growth suppression technique we 
include  measurements  that  describe  the  material 
strain  behavior  during  the  stress  and  thermal 
conditioning  as  well  as  a  beneficial  use  of  the 
suppression mechanism.  
Ratchet Growth Suppression Techniques 
Two  techniques  of  stress  application  for  the 
purpose  of  ratchet  growth  suppression  were  used 
for the experiments reported in this paper. The first 
method was simply a pressure vessel made out of 
stainless steel that had a thermocouple ported into 
it through one end cap and a pressure inlet on the 
other  side.  IHE  samples  were  placed  inside  the 
pressure  vessel  and  then  the  vessel  was  placed 
pressurization of the vessel was initiated and then 
a temperature profile was started. Various levels of 
pressure  between  0-psig  and  1000-psig  were 
applied to the specimens that were cycled 10 times 
between -54C and 74C. The temperature control 
profile  was  a  square  wave  with  2-hour  dwells  at 
both the upper and lower temperature limits. Fig. 1 
shows  the  suppression  system  layout  and  Fig.  2 
shows a picture of the pressure vessel.13  
Prior to insertion into the vessel each sample 
had its geometry and density measured. During the 
test  the  internal  vessel  and  external  chamber 
temperatures  and  the  vessel  gauge  pressure  were 
record.  No  method  of  strain 
measurement was employed on the samples in this 
arrangement and only the pre- and post-thermally 
cycled part dimensions and densities were used as 
a metric of ratchet growth suppression. 
The second technique used in this study was a 
more  complex  arrangement  of  hardware  and 
gauges.  Fixturing  that  we  had  previously  used  in 
confined  creep  testing  was  arranged  in  our  MTS 
environmental  chamber  and  hooked  up  into  our 
hydraulic  actuation  system.14  Fig.  3  shows  the 
layout of the hardware including a cross-sectional 
view highlighting the sample membrane pressure 
cavity and fixture interface.  
Fig.  1.  Ratchet  Growth  Suppression  System 
diagram showing the gas supply control computer 
environmental chamber. 
Fig. 2. A Tubular Series Reactor manufactured by 
High Pressure Equipment HiP was utilized in the 
pressurization study. The system consists of a cold 
drawn  304  stainless  steel 
placement  mild  steel  end  caps  a  thermocouple 
and  thermocouple  readout  and  a  pressure  inlet 
connected  to  a  dry  nitrogen  gas  supply  equipped 
with a pressure regulator not shown on the right. 
A temperature control profile was written and 
an  external  command  was  applied  that  controlled 
circumferentially  around  the  specimen  to  match 
the amount of axial stress measured with an inline 
load  cell.  This  system  had  3  linear  variable 
differential  transformers  LVDTs  mounted  at 
120  around  the  center  point.  The  LVDTs  were 
displacement  as  a  function  of  temperature  and 
Fig.  3.  The  same  fixturing  used  to  perform 
International Detonation Symposium was used to 
the  strain  response  of  IHE  during 
combined stress and temperature application. 
displacement measurements so that density of the 
temperature  and  stress  levels.  A  time  dependent 
view  of  the  combined  stress  and  temperature 
effects  allowed  us  to  better  understand  exactly 
what ratchet growth suppression actually means.  
In the following subsections we present details 
regarding the beneficial use of the two hydrostatic 
confinement techniques mentioned above in regard 
to three focus areas. 
Ratchet Growth Suppression 
Building  off  past  efforts  which  implied  that 
ratchet  growth  density  loss  could  be  eliminated 
through the application of pressure during thermal 
cycling we expanded our pressurization capability 
beyond  what  was  available  during  earlier  studies. 
Original  suppression  work  was  limited  to  the 
application of 135-psi suppression pressure. While 
this  level  of  pressure  resulted  in  some  mitigation 
of  density  loss  the  effect  was  not  completely 
eliminated. We obtained a pressure vessel that was 
capable  of  being  pressurized  to  several  thousand 
pounds per square inch. The layout and procedure 
for the ratchet growth suppression series was laid 
out in the previous section.  
Samples  with  dimensions  of  0.5-in  diameter 
by 1.0-in long were machined from three different 
lots  of  Holston  manufactured  LX-17-1 
851007  851009  and  851010.  Parts  from  lot 
851007  were  machined 
hemispherical  pressing  whereas  parts 
851009 and 851010 were machined from isostatic 
billets.  The  starting  densities  for  the  three  groups 
varied  from  about  1.901-gcc  for  851009  and 
851010  to  about  1.914-gcc  for  851007.  Fig.  4 
shows  the  density  versus  average  suppression 
pressure  data  for  the  three  lots.  The  horizontal 
dashed lines represent the average starting density 
for  two  different  lots  851007  1.914-gcc  and 
851009  1.901-gcc.  Sample  pairs  are  shown 
along  the  vertical  axis  on  the  chart.  The  hollow 
symbols  are  the  pre-conditioned  density  data 
points and the solid symbols are the same samples 
after thermal cycling 10 times. The curved dashed 
lines  are  second  order  polynomial  fits  to  the 
thermally conditioned data points. For lot 851010 
only one suppression pressure was tested. For both 
851009  and  851010  480-psi  was  sufficient  to 
suppress  ratchet  growth  whereas  for  851007  a 
pressure  over  700-psi  was  needed  to  eliminate 
evidence of density loss. 
Fig.  4.  A  plot  of  density  versus  average 
suppression  pressure  for  three  lots  of  LX-17-1.  
The  data  shows  various  levels  of  dependence  on 
applied pressure lot and possibly starting density.  
This  series  showed 
that  with  sufficient 
hydrostatic  confinement  pressure 
growth induced density loss could be eliminated. It 
is  unclear  whether 
confinement  pressure  needed  to  suppress  the 
irreversible expansion is based on lot differences 
starting density differences or pressing techniques. 
Logically  density  differences  between  starting 
materials  would  be  the  most  likely  contributor 
given that higher density parts have more capacity 
to  develop  voids.  Further  study  would  help  to 
In the next section we will take a detailed look 
at what is taking place within the samples from a 
strain  standpoint  that  leads  to  varying  levels  of 
ratchet growth suppression 
Time  Dependent  Strain  Response  to  Combined 
Stress and Temperature Change 
the  next  series  of  experiments  we 
measured  dimensional  changes  in  LX-17-1  under 
the  combined  effects  of  hydrostatic  confinement 
temperature  change.  Measurements  were 
performed  over  a  temperature  range  of  22C  to 
75C and at hydrostatic pressures that ranged from 
0 to just under 1000-psig. 
measurements  made  on  machined  0.5-in  diameter 
by 1-in long test cylinders of Holston lot 851007.  
Test  specimens  were  placed  in  a  confinement 
fixture  that  allowed  lateral  confinement  to  be 
applied  by  ducting  a  pressurized  gas  into  a 
chamber  surrounding  a  tubular  rubber  bladder 
containing  the  specimen.    Simultaneously  axial 
confinement  on  the  cylinder  was  generated  using 
an  MTS  hydraulic  test  machine.  The  axial  stress 
imposed on the specimen was controlled by an inline  digital  pressure  gauge  that  measured  the  gas 
pressure squeezing the specimen. As the transverse 
confinement  pressure  levels  changed  axial  stress 
levels were also caused to change in an equivalent 
confinement  condition  would  always  be  present 
during a test including during pressure ramp up as 
well  as  during  the  pressure  release  phases  of  the 
experiments.  Using  this  particular  test  method 
three  redundant  LVDTs  were  mounted  at  120 
degrees  relative  locations  around  the  specimens 
axis  of  symmetry  and  were  averaged  to  provide 
axial  displacement  data.  This  average  was  then 
used  to  calculate  the  inferred  axial  strain  in  the 
sample at any given time.  Because the test fixture 
itself  experiences  dimensional  change  with 
temperature and because the voltage outputs from 
this  way  a  hydrostatic 
themselves  also  change  with 
temperature  it  was  necessary  to  correct  for  these 
effects.  To  correct  the  fixture  strain  error  we  ran 
several  tests  with  ZeroDur  a  material  with 
expansion  over  our 
temperature  range  of  interest.  Running  the  test 
cycle  with  a  thermally  stable  sample  gave  us  the 
ability  to  measure  the  strain  change  associated 
with  the  fixture  only.  This  temperature  and  time 
dependent value could then be used to correct the 
data acquired for the IHE samples. 
Having established the means of correcting for 
the  effects  of  the  LVDT  fixture  on  our  thermal 
expansion  measurements  we 
multiple  experiments  on  LX-17-1.  In  an  effort  to 
arrive at as accurate correction values as possible 
we also ran tests on ZeroDur under the same test 
conditions  as  the  LX-17-1  for  each  level  of 
hydrostatic  pressure.  We  used 
values derived from each individual test condition 
on the corresponding LX-17-1 test data although 
based  on  end  results  we  saw  little  evidence  of 
variation in correction values based on changes in 
confinement pressure level.   
The  LX-17-1  tests  consisted  of  applying 
confining pressure to the samples at a ramp rate of 
approximately  10-psisecond 
allowing  the  specimen  to  remain  in  that  state  for 
approximately  800  seconds.  We  then  initiated  a 
the  chambers  automated 
temperature  control  system  of  1Cminute.  The 
ramp  up  continued  until  a  chamber  control 
temperature  of  75C  was  obtained.  The  control 
approximately  2  hours  at  which  time  it  was 
ramped  downward  at  1Cminute 
temperature and then held constant for a period of 
time  exceeding  one  hour.  A  series  of  tests  at  no 
confinement  pressure  at  approximately  250-psig 
500-psig  750-psig  and  just  under  1000-psig 
confinement pressure were performed on LX-17-1. 
As  previously  mentioned  we  also  performed  the 
corresponding tests on ZeroDur to determine the 
accompanying  correction  factors  at  each  pressure 
level. Fig.5 shows the strain and temperature data 
as  a  function  of  time  for  a  test  of  LX-17-1 
confined at 250-psig. The strain data in Fig. 5 has 
not  been  corrected  with 
correction factor. The data shows that the pressure 
has  a  distinct  effect  on  the  dwell  which  is  made 
evident  through  a  strain  reduction  during  the 
constant temperature portion of the test as well as 
an  overall  sample  reduction  in  length  after  the 
temperature  returns  to  room  temperature  and  the 
is  relieved.  Plastic  deformation  has 
occurred  and  not  only  has  ratchet  growth  been 
suppressed but the part has been densified. 
Fig. 5. A plot of strain and temperature versus time 
for an LX-17-1 sample hydrostatically confined at 
250-psig  and  thermally  cycled.  This  data  has  not 
the  fixture  strain 
contribution.  Nonetheless  negative  strain  during 
the temperature dwell can be seen and a permanent 
deformation  due  to  the  confinement  is  evident 
following cool down and pressure relief.  
Figures 6 displays the confined thermal results 
the  LX-17-1  samples  at 
confinement pressures 0-psig 250-psig 500-psig 
750-psig and 960-psig.  It should be noted that at 
0-psig a slight amount of axial stress was actually 
present  roughly  20  psi.    This  stress  was  due  to 
the  weight  of  the  lower  fixture  assembly.  Also 
during  the  experiments  the  applied  confinement 
to  drift  downward  slightly 
becoming  lower  by  several  percent  by  the  end  of 
the  experiments.  The  decay  appeared 
logarithmic in character and as a consequence the 
pressure  drift  decelerated  with  time  becoming 
comparatively  constant  during  the  later  stages  of 
The letters A B C and D have been chosen to 
define specific portions of the test period that are 
used  for  comparison  purposes.  The  effect  of 
pressure  can  be  seen  at  the  start  of  the  test  when 
pressure  is  applied  preceding  the  A  point.  The 
thermal ramp takes place between A and B and the 
isothermal  dwell  occurs  between  B  and  C. 
Between  C  and  D  is  the  temperature  ramp  down 
and the pressure is released at point D.  
Since many codes use density inputs we have 
converted linear strain to density.  Point B at zero 
pressure  agrees  well  with  the  measured  densities 
from earlier work where we looked at unconfined 
expansion.    Fig.  6  includes  a  second    y-axis 
whereby density may  be read from the data plots. 
The density values assume isotropy and an initial 
density  of  1.900  gcc.  The  values  are  calculated 
from the relationship 
Fig.  6.  A  plot  of  axial  strain  and  inferred  density 
versus  time  for  five  LX-17-1  confined  thermal 
Dimensional  changes  that  occur  in  materials 
temperature  changes  and  confinement  are  due  to 
the  additive  effects  of  both  thermally  induced 
dimensional  change  coupled  with 
dimensional  changes  arising  from  the  applied 
stresses.  For  purposes  of  convenience  in  this 
discussion we will make use of a term of our own 
making    CTSLE  which  stands  for  Combined 
Thermal  and  Stress  Induced  Linear  Expansion. 
The  reader  should  note  that  CTSLE  is  a  term  of 
convenience that helps us to quantifiably compare 
experiment to experiment the combined effects of 
strain induced by a temperature change over time 
compressive creep that occurs over that same time 
period. Inclusive in our definition of CTSLE is the 
division of the combined strains by the change in 
temperature T that occurs over the time period 
the  stress-induced  strain  i.e. 
in question. The values for CTSLE are determined 
experimentally and have inherent time-based e.g. 
creep history dependencies.  Since CTSLE values 
are entirely experiment dependent CTSLE values 
are not material properties.  For this reason these 
values are useful only for comparing results in sets 
of  experiments  performed  under  protocols  where 
the  timing  dwells  and  ramp  rates  are  exactly  the 
The  CTSLE  values  have  been  tabulated  for 
three  regions  of  the  5  confinement  tests  and  are 
shown in Table 1. The regions A-B and A-C show 
the  pressure  dependent  effect  on  the  sample. 
During  these  portions  of  the  test  the  sample  is 
experiencing  compressive  creep  compaction. 
Compressive  creep  compaction  is  dependent  on 
temperature stress level starting density and time. 
All  four  of  these  components  play  a  role  in 
determining  the  end  state  of  the  material.  Since 
confined  creep  asymptotically  approaches  a  limit 
regardless of temperature in our range of interest 
and  pressure  also  in  our  range  of  interest  we 
the  expansion  behavior  during 
portion C-D to converge regardless of confinement 
pressure. When the voids have been closed due to 
hydrostatic  compressive  creep  we  would  expect 
that the expansion behavior would be closest to the 
expansion as seen in the unconfined experiment at 
0-psig.  The  small  differences  seen  in  the  CTLSE 
of C-D over the pressure range is probably due to 
the fact that the creep compaction during A-C was 
not  yet  complete  and  if  the  isothermal  dwell  was 
carried  out  longer  these  numbers  would  be  even 
Table  1.  CTSLE  values  based  on  strain  and 
temperature  differences  for  different  sections  of 
linear  coefficient  of 
In  the  next  section  we  take  the  technique  of 
ratchet growth suppression and use it to condition 
parts  to  evaluate  the  effect  of  binder  aging  on 
mechanical properties. 
Binder Crystallinity Study 
Test to test variability has long been a topic of 
discussion in regard to experimental results for the 
mechanical  properties  of  energetic  materials. 
TATB-based explosives with a Kel-F 800 binder 
specifically LX-17-1 and PBX 9502 have been a 
primary  area  of  study  for  us  for  many  years.  We 
have looked at the compressive tensile and multiaxial loading behavior of these materials. In doing 
so a variable that has emerged as a key contributor 
to test-to-test variability within a specific material 
group is binder crystallinity. 
From  many  studies  we  know  that  these 
materials  are  both  temperature  and  strain  rate 
dependent.  In  addition  to  this  what  has  been 
observed  is  that  the  level  of  order  within  the 
plastic  binder  component  of  the  material  the 
crystallinity  affects  the  mechanical  stress  and 
strain behavior also. A clear understanding of the 
variation is important when long-term trend-based 
surveillance  programs  are  in  place.  Additionally 
in  order  to  have  confidence  margins  associated 
with our predictive models we need to understand 
how  much  variation  can  exist  with  the  same 
temperature and stress conditions. To this end we 
have  applied  the  use  of  our  Ratchet  Growth 
Suppression  technique  to  a  binder  crystallinity 
that  has  been  exposed 
Fundamental to the effort in determining testto-test  variability  is  having  samples  that  have  the 
same starting conditions. Since binder crystallinity 
formation is a function of time and temperature we 
needed  a  way  to  turn  the  clock  back  to  zero 
repeatedly  for  many  samples.  In 
different  options  we  realized  that  the  ratchet 
growth  suppression  system  gave  us  the  ability  to 
thermally treat a sample in a way that could melt 
the binder thus removing any trace of crystallinity 
from  it  while  at  the  same  time  maintaining  the 
parts geometry and density.  
In  this  study  0.5-in  diameter  x  1.0-in  long 
cylinders  of  PBX  9502  were  machined  from  an 
isostatically  pressed  billet.  The  finished  billet 
geometry was approximately 8-in in diameter x 8in long made of Holston manufactured virgin PBX 
9502  lot  891009.  The  billet  was  pressed  and 
radiographed at Pantex Plant in Amarillo TX and 
then  shipped  to  LLNLs  Site  300  for  further 
geometries  forty  right  circular  cylinders  were 
machined from this billet for compression testing. 
The  0.5-in  diameter  x  1.0-in  long  geometry  is  a 
compression  surveillance  testing.  Since  our  goal 
was to understand the possible test-to-test variation 
as a function of binder crystallinity especially as it 
relates to long-term surveillance trends we chose 
this  geometry  and  this  material.  Surveillance  test 
conditions of T50C and the strain rate control of 
0.0001s  were  used.  The  sample  group  was 
subdivided  into  three  groups  based  on  the  aging 
temperature to be used after the binder was reset. 
Room  temperature  22C  34C  and  47C  were 
chosen  as  the  three  conditioning  temperatures. 
Prior to conditioning the samples the density and 
geometry for each part was measured. Immersion 
density a precise technique that uses the material 
buoyancy  characteristics  to  measure  density  was 
measurements  showed  that  the  samples  were  all 
within a few mgcc of each other. 
the  samples  were  pre-characterized 
based  on  their  shape  and  density  they  were 
the  ratchet  growth  suppression 
system. Step one involved pressurizing the vessel 
to the point where the ratchet growth density loss 
would be eliminated. Tests were done beforehand 
to  determine  the  necessary  pressure  level  to 
achieve  full  suppression.  For  this  specific  set  of 
PBX  9502  specimens  the  necessary  pressure 
needed  to  eliminate  the  appearance  of  ratchet 
growth density loss was around 450-psi. Once the 
samples  were  pressurized  to  450-psi  a  thermal 
cycle was started that ramped the temperature from 
about  22C  up  to  110C  and  then  held  the 
temperature  steady  for  2  hours.  A  step  function 
was used to ramp the chamber as fast as possible 
for both the heat up and cool down phases of the 
thermal  cycle.  Care  was  taken  to  ensure  that  the 
thermal mass of the system allowed for the sample 
sufficient  melting 
temperature  105C.  Once  the  samples  were 
cooled  under  pressure  the  pressure  was  relieved 
and  the  parts  were  taken  for  another  round  of 
immersion  density  measurements.  This  process 
was repeated in groups of 6 until 34 samples were 
A group of four samples were taken and tested 
on the same day as melt conditioning. This group 
of  four  was  tested  and  their  properties  were  then 
used  as  a  baseline  to  which  all  of  the  aged 
specimens  were  compared.  The  four  samples 
showed little variation in their Peak Stress Strainat-Peak  Stress  and  Initial  Modulus.  In  Fig.  7  and 
Fig.  8  the  four  baseline  tests  are  shown  in  black 
and given the identifier 0 days which stands for 
0  days  of  aging.  All  three  groups  of  ten  samples 
were  tested  but  due  to  space  limitations  in  this 
paper  only  the  34C  stress  versus  strain  data  is 
shown.  Fig.  7  is  a  stress  versus  strain  plot  of  the 
34C group. Fig. 8 shows a magnified view of Fig. 
7 highlighting the upward and leftward trend of the 
peak stress point for the group of specimens. The 
binder aging mechanism drives the Peak Stress up 
and  the  Strain-at-Peak  Stress  lower.  It  should  be 
noted  that  the  mechanical  properties  differences 
based  on  time  aging  was  far  greater  than  test-totest variability seen in redundant tests. 
Fig. 7. Stress versus strain data for the 34C aged 
group  of  PBX  9502  specimens  compared  to  the 
baseline data. The time span of aging ranged from 
0 days up to a little over a year.  
The Peak Stress and the Strain-at-Peak Stress 
data from Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 in addition to the data 
temperature  and  47C  aged 
specimens  were  averaged  for  the  redundant  tests 
and then plotted on a log-linear scale in Fig. 9 for 
boundaries for model parameters. 
Fig.  8.  This  is  a  magnified  view  of  the  stress 
versus  strain  curves  for  the  34C-conditioned 
group.  There  are  two  tests  run  at  each  time  point 
except  for  the  baseline  tests  where  four  samples 
were  run.  The  change  in  stress  and  strain  as  a 
function of time can be seen to be diminishing as 
Fig. 9. Log-linear plot of Peak Stress versus days 
aging  as  a  function  of  temperature  for  the  PBX 
9502 compression data. All three curves start with 
the  baseline  data  at  0  days.  The  change  in 
is  strongly  affected  by 
Fig. 10 shows a similar time dependent aging 
plot  for  Strain-at-Peak  Stress.  In  both  plots  the 
data  has  been  fit  with  logarithmic  equations  and 
extrapolated  out  to  25  years.  The  extrapolation 
gives us a sense of where the data might be after 
sitting  around  for  a  long  time  at  the  various 
temperatures.  These  calculations  are  useful  when 
considering stockpile related models that are based 
on time sensitive material properties. The range is 
mechanical  properties  possible  as  driven  by  the 
level  of  binder  crystallinity  gives  us  reasonable 
Fig.  10.  Log-linear  plot  of  Strain-at-Peak  Stress 
versus days aging as a function of temperature for 
the  PBX  9502  compression  data.  Like  the  Peak 
Stress data all three curves start with the baseline 
data  at  0  days  and  the  change  in  Strain-at-Peak 
Stress is affected by the aging temperature. 
As a consequence of aging the tests showed a 
change  in  the  materials  compressive  behavior  in 
the form of an increase in Peak Stress a decrease 
in Strain-at-Peak Stress and an increase in Initial 
Modulus.  The  material  showed  changes  that  took 
place  more  rapidly  at  higher  aging  temperatures. 
Trending  plots  were  generated  to  illustrate  the 
relative  aging  effects  as  a  function  of  time  and 
temperature.  When  compared  to  the  freshly  reset 
material  at  just  over  a  years  time  aging  at  22C 
resulted in a 3 increase in Peak Stress aging at 
34C yielded an 11 increase in Peak Stress and 
at 47C a 15 increase. For Strain-at-Peak Stress 
respectively. Moduli were measured to increase by 
19  at  34C  and  by  28  at  47C.  At  22C  the 
moduli change effects were too scattered to assess 
Comparisons  were  made  between  our  newly 
generated data and results from surveillance data 
in  which  the  tested  material  had  been  in  the 
stockpile  for  many  years.  These  comparisons 
indicated  that  overall  our  thermally  induced 
binder aging caused our relatively freshly pressed 
billet material to behave more like material seen in 
the  stockpile  in  the  sense  that  the  material  is 
exhibiting  higher  Peak  Stress  less  Strain-at-Peak 
Stress as well as higher Initial Modulus values.  
The  application  of  hydrostatic  pressure  to 
compacted  PBX  material  can  eliminate 
occurrence  of  permanent  temperature  induced 
the  associated  density 
reduction  of  IHE  parts.  This  fact  has  been 
demonstrated  numerous  times  with  LX-17-1  and 
PBX 9502. Multiple benefits from our gas pressure 
induced  hydrostatic  confinement  technique  have 
been  demonstrated.  First  the  knowledge  that 
irreversible  expansion  of  the  material  caused  by 
temperature  increases  can  be  eliminated  when  a 
sufficient  confining  pressure 
important from a design and a predictive modeling 
perspective.  Second  our  ability  to  measure  the 
samples time dependent strain during thermal and 
stress cycles gives us insight into what is actually 
taking place during the suppression process. In situ 
strain  measurements  during  a  confined  thermal 
cycle shows that creep and thermal expansion are 
taking  place  concurrently  in  IHE  specimens  and 
that  the  final  density  depends  on  the  level  of 
confinement the length of the pressurization dwell 
and  probably  the  starting  density.  The  confined 
thermal  strain  response  is  convoluted  but  with 
careful  attention  to  detail  the  mechanism  can  be 
inform  other  density  dependent 
experimental results. A side benefit from this study 
is  that  we  learned  that  we  could  individually 
condition  parts  to  increase  their  density  to  enable 
sensitivity  measurements  in  a  material  and  time 
efficient  manner.  Third  our  ability  to  melt  the 
binder and not affect the geometry or density of a 
part gives us the opportunity to study the effects of 
time  and  temperature  related  binder  crystallinity Impact Initiated Combustion of Nickel-Aluminum and
Aluminum-Polytetrauoroethylene
John M. Densmore Mathew M. Biss Barrie E. Holman and Kevin L. McNesby
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Livermore CA 94550
Army Research Laboratory Aberdeen Proving Ground MD 21005
Abstract. Combustion of nickel-aluminum NiAl and aluminum-polytetrauoroethylene
Al-PTFE materials were studied using a pressure integrated PIG chamber. The reactive
material projectiles were launched with a nominal velocity of 1700 ms into a sealed chamber. Upon impact into a front cover plate the projectile fragments enters the chamber and
begins to combust. There are two primary reaction pathways for the projectile to release
energy solid state reaction between the projectile constituents and oxidation reaction with
the ambient atmosphere within the chamber. Peak temperatures of 3600 K NiAl and 3300
K Al-PTFE were reach after impact. The peak quasi-static pressure was reached 15-20
ms after impact at 28 psi NiAl and 18 psi Al-PTFE. Constant volume explosion calculation with CHEETAH indicate that about 55  of the total potential energy was released
Non-explosive energetic materials
reative materials and thermites are being investigated for many applications. They are of interest
because they can have higher mass and or volumetric energy densities than many explosives1. In this
study we gun launch reactive material samples at supersonic velocity into a sealed chamber. Upon impact high shear stresses are created in the material
which initiates chemical reactions. The technique is
similar to one employed by Ames2 3. Amess studies relied on the measurement of a quasi-static overpressure as the main metric. One rationale for looking at only the pressure is because structural damage
is primarily due to blast waves. Because quasi-static
pressure QSP is critically dependent on the experimental geometry its utility lies in providing a rel
ative ranking metric in performance while yielding
little information as to the underlying mechanisms.
Although the QSP has been related to energy output
only fast energy transfers to the working uid of the
chamber is captured. Relatively long processes like
thermal conduction from hot solids to surrounding
air can be underestimated. Thermal analysis is one
tool that may provide a more comprehensive analysis of the energy release pathways and can begin to
address the many unanswered questions concerning
the behavior of these materials.
The main modication of our experiment is the
addition of high-speed optical diagnostics. A side
of our experimental chamber is made of polycarbonate that allows imaging of the interior.
Imaging the interior allows the sample velocity ame
temperature burn duration and spectral signature to be measured. This report concentrates on
the measurement of ame temperature and pressure from nickel-aluminum NiAl and aluminumpolytetrauoroethylene Al-PTFE reactive materials.
properties4 5 6 7 8 9 optical properties10 mechanical properties 11 12 13 14 15 and numerical
simulations16 17 18.
The NiAl and AL-PTFE reactive materials RM
were supplied by General Science Inc. Micronsized starting powder were weighed by mass
for each RM 6832 - NiAl and 2674
- AlPTFE and isostatically pressed into rightcircular cylinders. The length-to-diameter ratio of
the sample was approximately one. Identical molds
were used to press each sample resulting in the material density controlling the mass of each sample.
The higher density NiAl samples had an average
mass of 11 g while the lower density Al-PTFE samples had an average mass of 6 g. Since the samples
are pressed powders they are structurally not very
strong. This resulted in several samples not surviving launch from the gun.
The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 119. The
samples are sabot launched from a smooth bore
30 mm gun. A series of break screens are used to
measure the initial sample velocity and trigger the
diagnostic instruments. The chamber frame is made
from rolled homogenous armour RHA steel. A
front face plate where the sample enters the chamber is made from 1.58 mm thick mild steel. The
sample ultimately impacts the rear anvil. The rear
anvil is made from 5.08 cm thick RHA steel. The
anvil is able to absorb multiple impacts before needing to be replaced while the front face plate is replaced after every shot. The front wall of the chamber is made from 5 cm thick transparent polycarbonate.
The projectiles ight breakup and combustion
are monitored with a series of high speed diagnostics. The sample is imaged with ash x-ray after it
enters the chamber. The projectiles complete ight
path was imaged using a high brightness shadowgraphy system. The shadowgraphy system consisted
of a retroreective background Cu-vapor laser light
source and high-speed monochrome camera. The
lasers pulse width which is equivalent to the exposure time of the camera was 20 ns. The camera was
ltered at the wavelength of the laser which effectively lters the emission from the combustion. The
temperature inside the chamber was measured using
high-speed imaging pyrometers with central wavelengths at 700 and 900 nm. Details of the imaging pyrometry technique can be found in20 21. The
chamber pressure was measured with PCB piezoelectric gauges that are mounted in the chambers
top. The pressure gauges frequency response was
Fig. 1. The ring setup consists of 30 mm smooth
bore gun A sabot launched sample B break
screens C and diagnostic chamber D. High
speed imaging optical pyrometry pressure gauges
and ash x-ray were used as diagnostics.
The samples initial velocity before entering the
chamber measured with a series of break screens
was 1725 ms NiAl and 1675 ms Al-PTFE. The
high velocity was required to produce high enough
shear stress to initiate chemical reactions in the
sample. As stated earlier the low strength of the
materials causes the sample to break-up upon impact into the face plate. A ash x-ray of a NiAl sample after entering into the chamber is seen in Fig. 2.
Technical issues with the x-ray system did not allow
a quantitative determination of fragment size distribution. From the image the projectile fragments
into roughly twelve parts with size less than 1 cm.
We can not determine if the fragments are solid or
consist of smaller pieces.
Fig. 2. Flash x-ray of NiAl after entering into chamber. The large fragment near the lower left corner is
the plug from the front face cover. The plug was
typically about 20 mm in diameter. The dark square
in the upper left is due to lm processing. Ligher
gray corresponds to higher density material.
The residual velocity of the sample inside the
chamber was measured with a high-speed shadowgraph system. Both materials remained supersonic
after entering the chamber. While both materials
had roughly the same initial velocity the NiAl retained a higher residual velocity of 1476 ms compared to Al-PTFE residual velocity of 998 ms.
A small amount of light was observed immediately after the sample perforated the front face plate.
While the chemical reactions began upon impact
with the face plate the main reactions were initiated
upon impact with the rear anvil. High-speed images of NiAl Fig. 3 and Al-PTFE Fig. 4 shows
the light that is observed upon impact with the face
plate and rear anvil. Temperature maps from the
optical pyrometer are shown in Fig 5 NiAl and
6 Al-PTFE. The frames were chosen to show the
representative behavior of the ames. In the temperature maps Fig. 5 and 6 the areas where a temperature can not be calculated because of either over
or under-exposure is plotted in white.
The peak ame temperature immediately after
entering the chamber is 3200 K NiAl and 2850 K
Al-PTFE. The high-speed images and temperature
Fig. 3. High-speed images of NiAl at t0 a and
380 s b. A small reaction is initiated upon impact
with the front face plate but the main reaction occurs
after impact with the rear anvil.
maps show a plume of material across the chamber.
For both materials there is a temperature gradient
across the plume. When the sample is supersonic
the ames leading edge is always cooler than the
body that follows. The temperature difference between the leading edge and body is 450 K NiAl
Peak ame temperatures produced by impact
with the anvil reach 3600 K NiAl and 3300 K AlPTFE. For both materials the region of the ame
near the anvil quickly cools to around 1950 K. As
Al-PTFE ame size increases its temperature raises
to approximately 3650 K before cooling. The NiAl
material begins to cool immediately after impact.
For both materials the interface with the ambient
atmosphere is hotter than the center of the ame. In
general there is a few hundred Kelvin decrease towards the center of the ame. The fact that the temperature is higher at the interface may indicate that
mixing with the atmosphere and secondary combustion is an important process.
The Al-PTFE material produced a large amount
of black soot. Correlating the high-speed movies
with the temperature maps indicate that the black
soot appears to obscure the pyrometers view of the
ame. The black soot does not emit a signicant
amount of radiation within the bandpass of the py
1617
temperature map of Al-PTFE.
The eld of view for each frame is approximately
Fig. 4. High-speed images of Al-PTFE. The green
spot in frame b is a reection from the Cu-vapor
laser that is used in the shadowgraph imaging.
Fig. 5. Spatial temperature map of NiAl. The eld
of view for each frame is approximately 8360 cm.
The sample enters the chamber at the left and impact
the rear anvil on the right.
rometer. The low intensity from the soot may indicate that either the soot is cold or its emissivity is
small. Postmortem analysis of the chamber interior
conrmed the existence of black soot after Al-PTFE
Figure 7 is a plot of the mean temperature in the
free-eld region of the chamber. We loosely dene the free-eld region to exclude the areas of front
face and anvil impact. It is difcult to completely
exclude the impact areas from the average and there
may be a small contribution from the impact. The
temperatures from the NiAl samples show excellent
reproducibility. A second Al-PTFE sample did not
survive launch from the gun.
The mean temperature is maximum after impact
and then decays over several milliseconds. The
NiAl ame temperature slowly decays over several
milliseconds to a constant temperature of 2200 K.
The Al-PTFE temperature quickly decays to a constant value. At 7 ms the Al-PTFE temperature appears to increase from 2600 K to 2800 K at 9 ms.
The apparent temperature increase is an artifact of
the ames intensity and limited DR of the pyrometer. The ame intensity is dened as the pixel count
produced by the ltered cameras. As the ame
temperature decreases the cooler regions intensity
drops below the threshold of the instrument. The
cooler regions become invisible to the pyrometer
and no longer contribute to the average temperature
resulting in an apparent increase in the mean temperature. This effect may be minimized by increas
1618
ing the pyrometers dynamic range.
Fig. 7. The free-eld spatial average temperature of
NiAl black-solid and Al-PTFE red-dashed. The
impact areas are excluded from the average. The
average error in the temperature is approximately
Discrete emission within the bandpass of the pyrometers lters can cause errors in the temperature calculations. An Ocean Optics HR2000 spectrograph recorded the ames spectral intensity between 450 and 700 nm. Light was collected over
the entire chamber for the duration of the event.
Discrete emission was only observed at 589 nm
sodium doublet and 510 nm and 578 nm cooper
vapor laser. The measured discrete emission did
not interfere with the optical pyrometry since the
emission was not within the bandpass of the instrument.
The pressure measured inside the chamber for
each sample is shown in Fig. 8. The pressure rises
to a maximum value approximately 20 ms after the
sample enters the chamber. After the peak pressure is reached there is a gradual reduction. The
quasi-static pressure is superimposed with a high
frequency signal which is the do to the shock wave
reverberating through the chamber. The NiAl peak
pressure is 12.6 psig at 22.5 ms and the Al-PTFE is
5.35 psig at 15.2 ms. The peak pressure is reached
15-20 ms after the peak temperature.
The thermochemical code CHEETAH was used
to predict the pressure and temperature for each
system. The system consisted of the atmosphere inside the chamber and the reactive material. On the
Fig. 8. Gauge pressure inside the test chamber for
NiAl blue and Al-PTFE red.
time scales of interest venting out of the chamber
is negligible. The calculation was performed under the assumption of constant volume. The pressures predicted by cheetah are shown in the Fig. 9
along with the measured values. The NiAl sample
releases 58 of the theoretical maximum while the
Al-PTFE releases 52.
Fig. 9. Experiment red and CHEETAH blue values for the pressure.
Impact-initiated combustion of NiAl and AlPFTE materials have been studied by measuring the
temperature and pressure inside a contained chamber. The peak temperatures reach 3600 K NiAl
and 3300 K Al-PTFE upon impact into a solid
steel anvil. These high temperatures are short lived
as the ame grows back into the chamber where
average free-eld temperatures are 2400 K NiAl
and 2600 K Al-PTFE. While the peak temperatures are measured in the rst few milliseconds the
peak pressure is reached 15-20 ms after the projectile enters the chamber. At late time the temperature
inside the chamber is most certainly above ambient. The pyrometer settings required to capture the
temperature upon initial impact does not allow for a
measurement at lower temperatures and longer time
This study was limited to two materials with a
xed set of initial conditions. There is a large phase
space of initial conditions that can be varied to enhance energy release. The phase space includes impact velocity starting powder size post impact fragment size solid state and oxidation reaction rates.
Additional studies are needed to optimize the energy release from these reactive materials. Focused
studies that breakdown the complex interaction into
more manageable states would greatly enhance the
understanding of these materials and there integration into applications.Relationships for the  Thermodynamic  Properties  of  Carbon  Phases  at  Elevated 
Temperatures and Pressures 
Leonard I. Stiel1  and Ernest L. Baker2  
1   NYU Polytechnic School of Engineering  Six Metrotech Center Brooklyn New York  11201 
2U.S. ARMY ARDEC Picatinny Arsenal New Jersey  07806 
  previously  developed  for 
  Accurate  relationships  have  been 
thermodynamic  properties      of  carbon  graphite  and    diamond  phases  at  detonation 
conditions.    Volumetric and heat capacity relationships were  produced   for graphite 
and  diamond carbon forms for use with the Jaguar thermochemical equilibrium program 
for  the  calculation  of  the  detonation  properties  of  explosives.    Available    experimental 
thermodynamic property  and Hugoniot data were analyzed to establish the  equations of 
state  for  the  carbon  phases.      The  equilibrium    diamond-graphite  transition  curve  was 
established  from the equality of the chemical potentials of the phases. The  analyses of 
Hugoniot  data  for    several  hydrocarbons  and  explosives  indicated  the    existence    of 
metastable    carbon  states  at  elevated  temperatures  and  pressures.    The  resulting 
relationships  were shown to enable the accurate calculation of detonation properties at 
appropriate conditions for several explosives.    
     In this study     results of    experimental  and theoretical  studies have been utilized  to 
establish additional   thermodynamic relationships  for a carbon liquid phase at elevated 
temperatures  and  pressures.    This  information  is  utilized  to  develop    coefficients  of 
extended  temperature-dependent  Murnaghan  relationships  for  the  volumetric  behaviour 
of the additional  liquid phase.   The appropriate equilibrium  phase boundaries  of the 
multiple  phase  system      are  established      from        the  minimization  of  the  Gibbs  free 
energy  of  the  system.  The    possibility      of  metastable    carbon  liquid  states  are  also 
examined  by analyses of the  detonation properties of  several compounds polymers and 
explosives.  The accuracy of the resulting relationships is demonstrated by comparisons  
of detonation properties calculated with Jaguar  for  several  substances and conditions 
including    the  Hugoniot  behavior  of  over-driven  explosives  at  high   temperatures  and 
     Several  recent    experimental and theoretical 
studies have been conducted on the properties and  
phase behavior of carbon at elevated pressures and 
temperatures.    However    there  is  still  incomplete  
information    available  particularly  for  the  liquid 
thermodynamic  properties  of  carbon  phases  at 
elevated temperatures and pressures are necessary   
for  a  number  of  purposes    including    for  the 
reliable calculation of the detonation properties of 
where B0 is the low pressure bulk modulus and n 
the derivative of the bulk modulus with respect to 
pressure.  The reference volume at  zero pressure 
is expressed as                 
                        
represented  as approximate linear relationships as 
temperature  dependences  of  B0i 
other  molecules  with 
for  Graphite  and  Diamond 
elevated temperatures  are   consistent with  recent 
theoretical      calculations6.    The      values      of         
thermochemical  equilibrium  program.    In  this 
B0i  298.15  and  ni  result  from    diamond  anvil 
study available information for  carbon liquid has 
volumetric  data  at  elevated  pressures78.    The 
been analyzed to extend  relationships  developed 
previously  for  diamond  and  graphite  phases    and   
values  of  di  of  Equation  3  were      estimated  by 
Day2  from  available  experimental  and  theoretical 
to    enable  the  accurate  calculation  of  detonation 
properties    for  wider  ranges  of  temperature  and 
information of the temperature dependences of the 
reference  state  bulk  modulus  for  the  carbon 
phases.  The  value  for  graphite  was  modified 
slightly  in  the  present    study.      Molar    volumes 
resulting    from  these  relationships  for  the  two 
carbon  forms      at  elevated  temperatures  and 
pressures  are  shown  in  Figures  1  and  2.    The 
values of the parameters of Equations 1 3 for  
representation  of  the  volumetric  behavior  of  the 
graphite  and  diamond  phases    are  included    in 
carbon  graphite and diamond phases 1                                                                      
         1                        
Fig.1. Graphite  volumes.
                       
                          
Fig.2. Diamond  volumes.
     Gustafson3 utilized similar relationships for the 
equation  of  state  of  carbon  phases  with  the  bulk 
modulus at the reference pressure B0i independent 
equations  of  state  of  the  form  of  Equation  1  to 
analyze    the  carbon  graphite-diamond  transition 
curve.  Fried  and  Howard4  developed  alternate 
temperature-  dependent  Murnaghan  relationships 
for carbon  graphite diamond and liquid  phases 
at elevated temperatures and pressures. 
     The  coefficients  of  Equation  2  for  graphite 
and  diamond      modified  slightly  in  the  present 
study  were  established  from  the  experimental 
volumetric  data  of  Touloukian  and  Buyco5.    The 
resulting    extrapolated   volumes for   diamond at  
                 2                                                                                      
temperature.  Recently  Day2 
of   the   reference  volume   Equation  2   were 
established to obtain agreement with the   diamond 
melting  point  curve  calculated  by  Wang  et  al12   
through ab initio molecular dynamics procedures.   
      The    value  of  di  for  the  liquid  phase  was 
estimated  as  -0.001    GPaK  to  obtain  further 
agreement with the graphite and diamond melting 
curves.  The constants resulting from this study for 
the carbon liquid phase are included in Table 1. In 
Figures  3  and  4  the  resulting    values  of  V0  and 
molar  volumes  by  these  procedures  are  shown  at 
elevated  temperatures  and  pressures.    The  heat 
Equation  4    is  assumed  to  be  the  same  as  for 
            4                                
Table 1. Coefficients of Equations 1 - 3. 
    The  reference  state  heat  capacity    for  a  carbon 
phase  is represented by the following polynomial 
K1000.  For  graphite 
coefficients of Equation 4 were established from 
the  NIST-JANAF  values9  for  temperatures    to 
6000  K.  For  diamond  the  data  of  Victor10  for 
temperatures to 1200 K were utilized and the heat 
capacities  were  assumed  to  be  the  same  as  for 
graphite    at  higher  temperatures.  The  coefficients 
of  Equation  4  for    the  graphite  and  diamond  
phases are included in Table 2. 
   Table 2. Coefficients of Equation 4. 
Relationships for Carbon Liquid 
     For  the  carbon  liquid  phase  Correa  et  al11 
volumetric  relationship 
molecular  dynamic  simulations  as  V0    5.1765 
cm3mol  B0    51.1  GPa  and  n    5.85.    In  this 
study  molar  volumes  calculated  from  the  Vinet 
equation  with  these  parameters    for  pressures  to 
235 GPa were expressed in  the  form of  Equation 
1  with  V0    5.1765  cm3mol  to  determine  the 
Murnaghan parameters  for the liquid phase as B0 
 59.43 GPa  and n  4.13.   The coefficients of 
the  relationship  for  the  temperature      dependence 
Fig. 3.  Liquid reference  volumes. 
Fig. 4.  Liquid volumes. 
Equilibrium  Transition Curves 
The chemical potential of each phase is calculated 
relationships of this study through the equation   
                                                                             5 
                                                                             6 
Values  of  the  reference  enthalpies  and  entropies 
0  at  298.15  K  for  each  carbon  phase 
utilized in this study are included in Table 3.                 
Table 3.  Reference state properties. 
     The  diamond-graphite 
potentials   for   the  phases is shown in Fig. 5. The  
diamond-graphite  transition  curve    is  consistent 
with  the  experimental  data  of  Kennedy  and 
Kennedy13  and  with  the  calculated  values  of 
Berman14.  The  phase  boundary  points  resulting 
from    the   carbon    relationships  of   Day2  are                              
Fig. 5. Graphite-diamond- liquid transition curves. 
somewhat higher at elevated temperatures. 
    The diamond-liquid and graphite-liquid melting 
curves resulting from the equality of the chemical 
potential of the appropriate phases are included in 
Fig. 5.  The graphite-diamond-liquid triple point  
resulting  from the intersection of the three melting 
curves in Figure 5 is at  4600 K and  12 GPa in 
approximate  agreement  with  the  experimental 
value15.    The  calculated  melting    curve    for 
dynamics values of Wang et al12 to about 100 GPa.  
The graphite liquid curve is generally consistent 
with  the  experimental  values  of      Togaya15  for 
pressures    from    about  3  GPa  to  the  triple  point.  
The calculated graphite liquid melting curve   has 
the  correct  negative  slope  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
triple point but does not become positive at lower 
pressures as indicated by the experimental data.  
Metastable Carbon States 
     At  shock  conditions  carbon  can  exhibit 
metastable  behavior  so  that  equilibrium  phase 
transitions  are  not  usually  attained1617.    Bundy  et 
al16  and  van  Thiel  and    Ree17    established  a 
metastable  graphite  region  at  normally  diamond 
phase  conditions  by  the  extrapolation  of  the 
graphite melting   curve    beyond    the    triple   
point.  A  metastable  diamond  region  at 
pressures  has  also  been  suggested  by 
curve18  to lower pressures.  
In  the  previous  study  on  carbon  phases1    in 
for  non-equilibrium  phase  
behavior  a  modified    diamondgraphite  phase 
transition  relationship  was    developed  utilizing  
Hugoniot  data  for  explosives  and  explosive 
products.  This modified phase boundary   can be 
expressed    analytically  for  pressures  to  about  20 
where P is in GPa and T in Kelvin.  
The  study  of  Viecelli  et  al19  indicated  that 
substantial  transformations  of  the  carbon  phase 
boundaries  occur  due 
nanometer  size  carbon  particles  in  the  shock 
products.  Corrections  to  the  bulk  Gibbs  free 
  7                      
several  hydrocarbons 
experimental  Hugoniot  values2223 
hydrocarbons and explosives. 
  and  detonation  properties  of  
 Hydrocarbon Hugoniots 
energy  were  provided  for  diamond  graphite  and 
liquid carbon   phases based   on estimates   for the  
particle  surface  energy  for  each  phase.  Modified 
phase  boundaries  were  calculated  for  several 
carbon  property  models420 
considerable  expansions  of  the  graphite  region  at 
low  temperatures  and  of  the  liquid  region  at 
elevated  temperatures.    By  this  procedure  the 
graphite diamond-liquid triple point is shifted to 
temperature  and  higher 
pressure  depending  on 
the  property  model 
    In  this  study  the 
  equilibrium  graphitediamond-liquid  triple    point has  been  maintained 
and  the  metastable  diamond-graphite  relationship 
is terminated by extension of the graphite  liquid 
melting  curve  as  shown  in  Fig.  6.        The 
  graphite    diamond  boundary 
exhibited in Figure 6 is expressed analytically as 
The  new  property  relationships  and  phase 
boundary  information  for  the  carbon  phases  were 
equilibrium  program21  to  analyze    Hugoniot  data 
polymers.  In Figure 7 comparisons of calculated 
presented  for  benzene  which    dissociates  into 
methane  hydrogen  and  carbon  at  elevated 
diamond  is  indicated  by  a  sharp  break  in  the 
Hugoniot  data  in    the  range  18-20  GPa.      The 
calculated  values   utilizing    Equation 8  for the  
metastable graphite boundary in this region  are in 
close  agreement  with  the  observed behavior.  It 
                                                                                    8                                
experimental  values 
procedure involving calculations with the graphite 
relationships  to  about  18  GPa  and  with  the 
diamond  relationships  from  20  -  55  GPa.    The 
calculated  temperature  is    above  6000  K  at  the 
highest  indicated  diamond  pressure. 
pressure  range  58.3  -  81.1  GPa    carbon  is 
determined  to be in the two phase diamond-liquid 
increasing  to  0.7  at  the  highest  pressure.  The 
temperatures are in the range 6280 6850 K in this 
that  good  agreement  with 
In the studies of Bundy et al16 and  van Thiel and 
Ree17  the  metastable  diamond  boundary  was 
established  by  the  extrapolation  of  the  graphite 
melting  curve  to  considerably  higher  pressures 
temperatures.   The possibility of the   expansion 
of the liquid region for detonation conditions by  a 
shift  in  the  triple  point  conditions    will  be 
considered further in this study by  examinations   
indicated  by  Equation 
transition  from  graphite 
Fig. 6. Nonequilibrium carbon transitions. 
Fig. 7. Benzene Hugoniot values. 
region.  It can be seen from Fig. 7 that  somewhat 
poorer  agreement  with  the  experimental  data  at  
high  pressures    results  if    carbon  is  forced  to  be 
liquid  in  this  region.    Therefore  an  expansion  of 
the  liquid  region  beyond  that  determined    by  the 
melting curves  of Fig. 6 is  not strongly indicated 
       In Fig. 8 the results of Jaguar thermochemical 
calculations  for  high  density  polyethylene  which  
also dissociates to methane hydrogen and carbon 
at  elevated  pressures  are  compared  with 
experimental  values2223  for  pressures  from  20    to 
appropriate  carbon  phase  for  the  entire  range.  
Temperatures as high as 4400 K are attained at the 
highest  pressure.  At 
polyethylene is indicated to be undissociated. 
Detonation Properties of Explosives 
     The  relationships  of  this  study  for  graphite 
diamond and liquid carbon phases have also been 
tested  with  Jaguar  by  comparison  with  Hugoniot 
and  detonation  values  for  several  explosives.    In 
Fig.  9  close  agreement  is  exhibited  between 
experimental  overdriven  Hugoniot  values    for  
COMP-B24  which  forms  substantial  amounts  of 
carbon  in  the  chemical  equilibrium  calculations. 
The   calculations   indicate   that   carbon  is in the  
diamond  form  for  the  entire  Hugoniot  curve  for 
pressures to 73 GPa.  The calculated temperature 
Fig. 8.  Polyethylene Hugoniot values. 
Fig. 9. COMP-B Hugoniot values. 
is  about    6000  K  at  the  highest  pressure  and 
similar  agreement  results if carbon is forced to be 
liquid at elevated pressures on the Hugoniot.   
Results  of  comparisons  of  Hugoniot  values  
for the highly oxygen- deficient explosive TNT are 
presented in Fig.  10.  Diamond is indicated to be  
the correct carbon phase for pressures from about 
28    to  72  GPa  which  covers  the  range  of  the 
available data24.  At 74 GPa and 6700 K  carbon  is 
a  two  phase  mixture  of  diamond  and  liquid.      At 
elevated pressures the calculated Hugoniot values 
are  similar  to  those  for  diamond  if  the  carbon  is 
forced to  be  in  the  liquid  region.  For  the  C-J  
Fig. 10. TNT Hugoniot values. 
values  of  TNT  for  densities  from  1.1  to  1.64 
gcm3  the    procedures      of  this  study  for  carbon 
properties result in a two  phase graphite diamond 
mixture  at  the  highest  density  and  the  formation 
of the metastable graphite form at lower densities. 
For most of the range somewhat closer agreement 
between calculated and experimental C-J velocities 
resulted with the graphite form1.  
forms  considerable 
        The  explosive  BTF 
  exhibits  a  high 
temperature at the C-J point.  With the  procedures 
of  this  study  at  a  density  of  1.852  gcm3      the 
calculated  C-J  point  is  at  37.6  GPa  and  5663  K  
and      carbon  is  a  two  phase  diamond-  liquid  
mixture  with   a   small   weight fraction of liquid.   
The calculated C-J velocity is 8.77 kms compared 
to  an   experimental   value  of  8.49 gcm3 at this 
 density25 .    On  adiabatic expansion from the C-J 
point  the carbon phase is indicated to be diamond 
until  about  15  GPa    and  graphite  at  lower 
pressures.   However if   the  metastable graphite  
diamond relationship of Equation 7  is applicable 
to  higher  temperatures  approaching  the  diamond 
melting  curve  graphite  would  be  the  appropriate 
phase for all pressures  below the C-J point on the 
 In  order  to  investigate    the  correct  carbon  
behavior    in  this  region    cylinder  velocities    for 
BTF  were  calculated  at  this  density  utilizing  the 
analytic cylinder model  26  with   constants of the 
JWLB equation of state  generated by the  Jaguar 
principal    adiabat  calculations.      As  shown  in 
Figure 11    the cylinder velocities resulting with  
the  expanded  diamond 
region  at  elevated 
temperatures indicated   in Figure 6   are in  closer 
agreement with the experimental values of Souers 
and Kury25 for BTF than if  the metastable graphite 
boundary  of  Equation  7    is  applied      to  higher 
this  study  available  experimental  and 
theoretical   information   for   carbon   liquid have  
been   utilized   to   complete the description of the 
thermodynamic properties  of  carbon  phases  for  
detonation calculations.  The relationships of this 
study  for  carbon  liquid  are  considered  to  be 
accurate  to  about  100  GPa  and  8000  K  with 
primary   emphasis   devoted   to   the  range   of 
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Fig. 11.  Cylinder Velocities for BTF. 
conditions  for  most    calculations  of  explosive 
formulations.  The resulting calculations for shock 
conditions incorporating the established  diamond 
graphite  and  liquid  equilibrium  and  metastable  
phase transitions are in general agreement with the 
available experimental values.  
     Previous    studies  on  revised      carbon    phase 
boundaries1619  have  involved  modified    heats  of 
formation  or Gibbs free energies   for the graphite 
diamond  and  liquid  phases.    By  this  approach 
Viecelli  et  al19  performed  equilibrium  phase 
calculations with the modified properties to obtain 
considerable  enhancements  of  the  graphite  and 
liquid  regions    and  reduction  of    the  range  for  
diamond  formation at detonation conditions. This 
approach necessitates the  shifting of the graphitediamond-liquid    triple  point  and  graphite  and 
diamond melting lines.  In this study the modified 
phase  transitions    are  considered  to  be  due  to 
metastable  phase  formations  and  appear  to  be  
confirmed for the  graphite  diamond boundary at 
moderate      pressures  and    temperatures      by  
hydrocarbons  and  explosives.    However  similar  
analyses do not strongly suggest  enhancements of 
the  liquid  region  to  higher  pressures    and  lower 
temperatures  at  which  conditions  diamond  is  the 
equilibrium phase.   This behavior is possibly due 
to  the  similarity    of  carbon  diamond  and  liquid 
properties at elevated  temperatures and pressures.  
More  accurate  thermodynamic  data  is  required 
particularly  for  the  liquid  phase  to    establish  the 
correct carbon forms for detonation states at  high 
temperatures and pressures. New Insights to the Irreversible Thermal Expansion of PBX 9502 
W. Lee Perry Amanda L. Duque Joseph T. Mang and Edward Roemer 
Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos New Mexico 87545 USA 
Abstract. TATB-based explosives are known to undergo irreversible thermal expansion 
after single or multiple thermal cycles. This phenomenon has significant implications for 
mechanical properties and shock initiation behavior. Researchers have concluded that the 
irreversibility  arises  due  to  binder-crystal  interactions  andor  from  damage  within 
individual crystals. Here our aim was to develop a clearer picture of the damage length 
scale  that  leads  to  irreversible  growth.  To  do  so  we  rapidly  heated  and  cooled  a  PBX 
9502  sample  to  200  C  and  observed  the  resulting  material  with  dye  intrusion 
poresimmetry scanning electron microscopy small angle neutron scattering and Raman 
spectroscopy.  There  was  clear  evidence  of  mesoscale  damage  on  a  length  scale  of  1 
micron  or  less.  There  was  also  indirect  evidence  that  intra-crystalline  damage  did  not 
occur although that evidence was not conclusive. 
Researchers  have  invested  considerable  effort 
from both a safety and performance perspective to 
mechanisms  that  control  initiation  sensitivity  and 
corner-turning  behavior  of 
triaminotrinitrobenzene-TATB  5  KelF  800. 
There  is  general  consensus  that  the  mesoscale 
terms  void  size  and  shape 
distribution  dominates  these  metrics.  Our  current 
understanding  suggests 
that  pores  and  voids 
concentrate  energy  from  a  shock  wave  such  that 
the  number  of  pores  and  voids  of  the  appropriate 
size  morphology  and  spatial  distribution  will 
affect  the  critical  shock  energy  required  for 
initiation1  and  will  also  affect  corner  turning 
Several  factors  in  the  formulation  and 
pressing of the explosive can affect the mesoscale 
morphology  and  therefore  the  sensitivity.  The 
nominal parameters for these explosives have been 
chosen  in  part  to  provide  a  balance  between 
performance.  Post-manufacturing  environmental 
factors  have  also  been  shown  to  affect  the 
mesoscale  morphology  and  therefore  sensitivity. 
Thermal  expansion  affects  density  and  both  PBX 
9502  and  LX-17  92.5  TATB  7.5  KelF800 
have  been  shown  to  become  significantly  more 
sensitive at elevated temperature and the available 
evidence  suggests  this  is  due  to  the  reduction  in 
density  associated  with  thermal  expansion.3  For 
example the run distance to detonation in LX-17 
from  a  well  supported  10  GPa  shock  is  reduced 
from 30 mm to 10 mm at 75 C and may be prompt 
at 200 C.3  Little is directly known about the effect 
of thermal expansion on corner turning.  
Conditions that lead to elevated temperatures 
mechanical or thermal damage can have an effect 
as  can  thermal  cycling  through  the  expected 
service  temperature  range.  The  latter  process 
causes  a  phenomenon  colloquially  known  as 
ratchet growth  which occurs due to irreversible 
thermal  expansion.  Gustavsen  has  shown  that  4 
thermal  cycles  to  110  C  reduces  the  density  by 
1.2  and  reduced  the  run  to  detonation  from  a 
well-supported 14 GPa shock from 5.3 mm to 5 
mm 5.7. It is an ongoing topic of research and 
irreversibility and data and literature suggest that 
damage  occurs  on  a  range  of  length  scales  from 
intra-crystalline effects to mesoscale binder-crystal 
delamination.45  Here  we  clarify  the  length  scale 
on  which  thermally  induced  damage  occurs  by 
examining a PBX 9502 sample that was subjected 
to a single thermal cycle over a range of times and 
temperatures reducing the density permanently by 
up  to  2.5.  The  samples  were  thin  2  mm  and 
subjected  to  a  very  high  heating  and  cooling 
quench rate. We also expect more significant or 
exaggerated  changes  to  occur  if  the  material  is 
pressed to near TMD and the initial density of our 
samples was 1.92 gcc Nominal 1.90 gcc TMD 
1.942  gcc.  The  samples  were  analyzed  by 
scanning electron microscopy SEM small angle 
neutron  scattering  SANS  Raman  spectroscopy 
and dye intrusion poresimmetry DIP. 
Samples were prepared from Holsten lot. Grams of 
molding powder were pressed into a  die at ksi 
and  held  at  C  and  allowed  to  cool  over  several 
hours. The resulting density was 1.92 gcc and the 
samples  were  2  mm  thick.  Figure  1  shows  a 
sample as received from the press. 
Figure 1 1.92 gcc PBX 9502 samples used in this 
The  samples  were  thermally  cycled  in  a  1 
diameter  vertically  oriented  tube  furnace  held  at 
200  C.  The  samples  were  mounted  on  a   
diameter aluminum disk and supported on a glass 
rod. A thermocouple was attached to the bottom of 
the aluminum disk. Samples were inserted into the 
center  of  the  furnace  where  the  thermocouple 
equilibrated to 200 C in less than 30 seconds. We 
assume due to the thin-ness of the sample it also 
equilibrated  in  less  than  1  minute.  The  material 
was held in the furnace for approximately 4 hours 
removed  and  immediately  placed  on  a  copper 
block  for  rapid  cooling.  We  then  analyzed  these 
samples using DIP scanning electron microscopy 
and Raman spectroscopy.  
SEM  imaging  was  performed  on  a  LEO-Zeiss 
Microscope  with  an  InLens  SE  detector.   The 
samples were first coated with a 10 nm conductive 
layer AuPd and imaged using a 4 mm working 
distance 30 m aperture and 1 kV beam voltage. 
The area of the samples to be imaged was marked 
with a fine-pointed tool and then the sample was 
cleaved  through  this  region.  One  half  of  the 
sample was then thermally cycled and the images 
were  acquired  in  areas  that  were  originally  very 
close  1mm to one another.  
Ultra-  and  Small-angle  neutron  scattering  derive 
from  fluctuations  in  the  scattering  length  density 
r.    The  scattering  intensity  IQ  is  directly 
related  to  the  sample  microstructure  through  the 
squared Fourier transform of r and is measured 
as  a  function  of  the  scattering  vector  Q  of 
magnitude  Q    4sin.  Here   
wavelength  of  the  incident  neutrons  and   is half 
of the scattering angle. 
USANS and SANS measurements were performed 
Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology Center for Neutron Research NCNR 
using the BT-5 Perfect Crystal SANS instrument6 
and a monochromatic neutron wavelength of 0.24 
nm  and  the  NG7  30-m  SANS  instrument7  with  a 
monochromatic  neutron  wavelength  of  0.5  nm. 
The BT-5 instrument is a Bonse-Hart camera with 
a maximum effective Q-range of 0.0003  0.1 nm-1 
and the NG7 instrument is a pinhole camera with a 
maximum  Q-range  of  0.008    7.0  nm-1.  The 
instruments  allows 
structures in the range from 0.001  20 mm to be 
probed.  Data  were  reduced  by  conventional 
methods  and  corrected 
for  empty  cell  and 
background  scattering.8  The  BT-5  data  were 
corrected  for  slit  smearing  effects  using  the  Lake 
method.9  Data  from  BT-5  and  NG-7  were 
combined  to  form  a  single  scattering  curve  over 
the  entire  Q-range.  Absolute 
reported in units of cm-1.  
Figure 2 shows the DIP results. While no 
quantitative information was gained the process 
provides a clear qualitative visualization of the 
increase in porosity that occurred during the 
Figure 2. Comparison of the effect of a single thermal cycle of PBX 9502 from RT to 200C by dye 
intrusion poresimmetry. 
The following pages Figure 3 show the SEM results with the thermally cycled material in the left column 
and  control  sample  in  the  right  column.  These  images  quite  clearly  show  the  significant  change  in  the 
mesoscale morphology that occurs during thermal expansion. Beam voltage magnification and scale are 
shown on each image. Recall that we rapidly the samples to room temperature and it is possible that this 
quenching  had  the  effect  of  freezing  the  morphology  and  a  slower  cooling  rate  may  allow  a  more 
complete relaxation of the structure. 
Figure 3 Scanning electron images of high density PBX 9502 thermally cycled to 200C left column and 
as pressed right column. 
Figure 3 contd Scanning electron images of high density PBX 9502 thermally cycled to 200C left 
column and as pressed right column. 
Figure 3 contd Scanning electron images of high density PBX 9502 thermally cycled to 200C left 
column and as pressed right column. 
Figure 3 contd Scanning electron images of high density PBX 9502 thermally cycled to 200C left 
column and as pressed right column.
It  appears  from  these  images  that  the  binder 
network  has  been  severely  disrupted  forming  a 
network  of  connected  porosity  with  a  qualitative 
characteristic size of near 1 micron. The images are 
also  consistent  with  a  mechanistic  picture  of 
thermal expansion of the crystals delamination of 
the binder from the crystals and an inability of the 
system  to  return  to  its  original  configuration  on 
Figure  4  L  shows  the  SANS  results 
comparing  the  thermally  cycled  versus  as-pressed 
material.  There  are  clear  differences  between  the 
two  samples.  Measured  scattering  curves  were 
analyzed  as  a  two  phase  system  by  non-linear 
least  squares  methods.  For  all  of  the  samples 
studied  the  voids  represent  the  minor  phase 
suggesting that the measured scattering arises from 
the  voids.  It  is  possible  that  both  inter-  between 
grains and intra- granular within grains voids are 
present in the samples studied but there is no way 
to  distinguish  between  the  two  with  the  current 
measurements.  We  note 
between intra- and inter-granular voids in a pressed 
sample is tenuous - at high density inter-granular 
voids  can  be  closed-off  from  outer  surfaces  much 
like  intra-granular  voids.  The  data  were  analyzed 
according  to  a  recently  developed  model10  that 
characterizes  the  void  morphology  as  volume 
fractal  aggregates.  A  volume 
hierarchical  structure  composed  of  correlated 
primary particles or voids and can be considered 
as  an  irregular  network  of  these  particles.  Such  a 
network  may  represent  a  crack  in  an  individual 
high  explosive  grain  or  an  extended  void  among 
several crystals. The volume fractal dimension can 
have  values  between  1  and  3  and  for  porous 
systems  larger  values  indicate  a  more  symmetric 
volume-filling network of voids. 
The solid lines in the Figure 4 L are the 
result  of  fits  to  the  fractal  model.  Both  samples 
display a volume fractal structure with a dimension 
 1.9 as indicated by the slope of the data below Q 
  4  x  10-4  -1.  Also  seen  in  the  figure  is  that  the 
heated  sample  has  a  larger  scattering  intensity 
compared  to  the  baseline.  As  the  intensity  is 
proportional to the volume fraction of voids in the 
sample  this  indicates  a  larger  volume  of  voids  in 
the heated sample. The arrows in the figure point to 
kinks or knees in the data curves that are indicative 
of a characteristic size of the voids. As seen in the 
figure the knee appears at a smaller value of Q for 
the  heated  sample  compared  to  the  baseline.  This 
indicates  that  the  average  size  of  the  voids  in  the 
heated  sample  is  larger  than  the  baseline  sample. 
Indeed  analysis  revealed  a  mean  void  radius  of 
0.17  m  for  the  heated  sample  and  0.046  m  for 
the baseline sample. The right-side graph in Figure 
4  shows  a  similar  comparison  for  PBX  9501  that 
had  been  heated  to  184  C  and  held  for  14  hours. 
This  thermal  treatment  is  known  to  induce  the 
well-studied      phase 
transition.  A  6-7 
volume  change  accompanies  this  phase  change 
and the process causes extensive microscale intracrystalline  damage.11  The  divergence  of 
scattering intensity-inverse length curves at a much 
higher values suggests that intra-crystalline damage 
is not present in the PBX 9502 sample. However 
Figure 4. SANS comparison of the effect of a single thermal cycle of PBX 9502 from RT to 200C. The data 
analysis revealed a 3 fold increase in void size after heating.
There  are  no  known  room-temperature  stable 
polymorphs  of  TATB  hence  we  do  not  expect 
molecular  conformal  changes  to  be  the  source  of 
irreversible  thermal  expansion.  Trot  and  Renlund 
did  show  distinct  temperature  dependence  of  
Raman spectral line widths and shifts for the C-C 
and  C-NH212  however  those  authors  did  not 
irreversibility  occurred.  Raman 
spectra  785  nm  excitation  results  shown  in 
Figure  5  confirm  that  there  was  no  change  in 
molecular  symmetry  in  these  samples  that  would 
accompany  a  solid  state  phase  change  as  is 
apparent in the HMX    phase transition.13 
Figure 4. Raman spectra 785 nm excitation 
comparing the PBX 9502 before and after a single 
thermal cycle from RT to 200C. No significant 
differences are observed which implies there is no 
permanent change in the crystal structurepacking 
arrangement of the TATB molecules. 
Small high density 1.92 gcc PBX 9502 samples 
were  rapidly  heated  to  200  C  held  for  4  hours 
then  rapidly  cooled  to  room  temperature.    We 
examined the samples with the aim to understand 
thermal  expansion.  SEM  analysis  showed  widescale damage on the mesoscale apparently in the 
binder  network  with  a  characteristic  size  of 
approximately 1 micron. SANS analysis showed a 
significant increase in porosity to a length scale on 
the order of 0.5 micron. Comparing the PBX 9502 
length  scale  associated  with 
analysis  to  a  similar  HMX  analysis  the  results 
suggest  that  we  could  potentially  rule  out  intracrystalline damage but the data are not sufficient 
to make a firm conclusion. Further experiments are 
planned  to  specifically  examine  intra-crystalline 
damage for thermally-cycled TATB. 
This  work  was  supported  by  the  Joint  DoD  DOE 